CALIFORNIA DROUGHT; The driest year in a century; Exceptionally low accumulation of rain and snow across the state is exacerbated by climate change, reviving fears of emergency measures
Los Angeles Times
October 18, 2021 Monday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: CALIFORNIA; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 1
Length: 887 words
Byline: Laura Anaya-Morga
Body




In a year of both extreme heat and extreme drought, California has reported its driest water year in terms of precipitation in a century, and experts fear the coming 12 months could be even worse.
The Western Regional Climate Center added average precipitation reported at each of its stations and calculated that a total of 11.87 inches of rain and snow fell in California in the 2021 water year. That's half of what experts deem average during a water year in California: about 23.58 inches.
The climate center tallies rainfall by averaging all of the measured precipitation in the state at the end of a water year, which runs Oct. 1 through Sept. 30.
Based on the diminished levels of both precipitation and runoff, the last water year was the second driest on record, according to the California Department of Water Resources.
The last time the state reported so little rain and snowfall was in 1924.
Climatologists have compared the drought conditions that spanned 2020 and 2021 to the 1976-77 drought, which included California's lowest level of statewide runoff in a single water year.
The average rainfall in 1976-77 was 28.7 inches; in 2020-21, it was 28.2 inches.
A federal report placed the economic losses from the 1976-77 drought over $1 billion, and some feared that drought could cripple the state's water system.
The current multiyear drought has revived the same fears, as reservoirs are depleted and emergency drought proclamations have been issued in 50 of California's 58 counties. Gov. Gavin Newsom has called on Californians to voluntarily reduce water use by 15%, and state officials say they may impose mandatory water restrictions if dryness continues this winter.
"The history of California has been written in long droughts," said Bill Patzert, a retired climatologist who worked for decades at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory studying the effects of climate change. "There's a lot of water, but it comes down to how it's used."
The U.S. Drought Monitor, a map updated weekly showing drought- related conditions in the United States, indicates that over 87% of California is experiencing extreme or exceptional drought, with nearly half the state in the worst category.
Less rain has meant less water, especially in areas such as the Colorado River, an important source of imported water for Southern California.
Nevada's Lake Mead, a major water source for Los Angeles and the West, has been declining since 2000, and recovery is grim, experts say. Even if a great water year was on the way, "you're not even going to come close to refilling Lake Mead," said Daniel McEvoy, a climatologist with the Western Regional Climate Center.
All but two of California's major reservoirs are below their average storage level. Lake Oroville, the second-largest reservoir in the state, is at a record low. And Lake Shasta, the largest reservoir, is critically low -- although not as low as it was in 1977, McEvoy said.
But unlike in 1977, the drought effects have been worsened by accelerated climate change. Increasingly warmer temperatures have evaporated precipitation and melted snowpack much faster than in previous years, according to a study by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
"The warm temperatures that have helped make this drought so intense and widespread will continue (and increase) until stringent climate mitigation is pursued and regional warming trends are reversed," the study says.
California recorded its hottest summer this year, and the extreme heat has parched the landscape.
And as the newest water year begins, the state could be in for more of the same. La Nina conditions that typically bring dry winters to California and the Southwest have emerged in the Pacific Ocean, NOAA reported Thursday.
"We've already had this dry year, we're in a drought situation, and then trends are that it potentially could be below the low rainfall season again this winter," said Jayme Laber, senior hydrologist with the National Weather Service's office in Oxnard. "All those things add up to not looking good."
NOAA climatologists forecast the present drought to last into 2022 and potentially longer. And though California eventually will get wetter, experts say an extreme weather change is needed to get the state back to normal.
"It's going to take a while ... until we start getting some rain, and enough rain where we start recharging groundwater basins or getting enough rainfall that we start seeing water in our rivers and streams again," Laber said.
Jeanine Jones, the interstate resources manager for the Department of Water Resources, said the state would need about 140% of its average precipitation to reset the water table.
Precipitation varies across California, and the dry Southern California climate is much different from the wet and snowy Sierra Nevada. In an average year, three-quarters of the state's precipitation falls in Northern and Central California, mostly in the Sierra, NASA experts say.
But Southern California has the highest annual variability of precipitation in the United States, meaning that any year could swing wildly from wet to dry conditions.
"As scientists think about the long-term effects of climate change, one of the expectations is that this variability will be enhanced," Jones said. Or, as she likes to put it, "the extremes become more extreme."
 Graphic



End of Document


EXTREME HEAT; Heat waves: A hidden killer; Deaths from hot weather are vastly undercounted, and the state's readiness lags, a Times investigation shows
Los Angeles Times
October 10, 2021 Sunday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN NEWS; Metro Desk; Part A; Pg. 1
Length: 4779 words
Byline: Anna M. Phillips, Tony Barboza, Ruben Vives, Sean Greene
Body




It was the hottest August on record in California.
For more than three weeks in 2020, back-to-back heat waves settled over the Southwest, claiming dozens of lives and leaving tens of millions of people sweltering in triple-digit temperatures. The days brought suffering and the nights offered little relief. On maps of the record heat, Southern California glowed like an ember, its normally temperate coast shaded orange, its inland cities and desert towns a deep, smoldering purple.
Seventy-three-year-old Jorge Valerio-Santiago went to work on Aug. 20 digging cable trenches at a mobile home park outside Desert Hot Springs in Riverside County. After several hours, he began to feel ill and returned home to a trailer that lacked air conditioning. His nephew found him that evening, lying still in the dirt driveway where he had gone into cardiac arrest. The paramedics pronounced him dead at the scene.
When a second heat wave bore down roughly two weeks later, Anne Gacambi Methu's family hoped she would be safe inside her assisted living facility in Riverside. But on that 117-degree day, she was outside for hours, according to a coroner's report, and last seen by staff while walking around the facility's courtyard. It was only after a shift change that employees found her lying on the ground.
Extreme heat is one of the deadliest consequences of global warming. But in a state that prides itself as a climate leader, California chronically undercounts the death toll and has failed to address the growing threat of heat-related illness and death, according to a Los Angeles Times investigation.
Between 2010 and 2019, the hottest decade on record, California's official data from death certificates attributed 599 deaths to heat exposure.
But a Times analysis found that the true toll is probably six times higher. An examination of mortality data from this period shows that thousands more people died on extremely hot days than would have been typical during milder weather. All told, the analysis estimates that extreme heat caused about 3,900 deaths.
California's undercount is one of the ways it overlooks the threat posed by heat waves, even as climate change delivers them more frequently, more intensely and with deadlier consequences. Other states are moving with greater urgency to confront this public health challenge that disproportionately imperils the elderly and vulnerable.
Extreme heat did not suddenly become a threat to Californians' lives. The Times found that state leaders have ignored years of warnings from within their own agencies that heat was becoming more dangerous. Data reviewed by The Times show heat-related hospital visits increasing in some parts of California, including Los Angeles County, for at least the last 15 years.
Experts interviewed by The Times said an effective state response would include identifying and assisting vulnerable populations, and putting in place a surveillance system to track when and where heat-related deaths and injuries are occurring. But the California Department of Public Health doesn't collect that kind of real-time data. It can't say how many people died in last year's heat waves because it does not examine death records during severe heat waves -- as authorities in Oregon and Washington did this summer after days of record-breaking temperatures.
Each year, extreme heat kills more Americans than any other climate-fueled hazard, including hurricanes, floods and wildfires, but it gets far less attention because it kills so quietly.
Like other effects of climate change, its harms fall most heavily on the poor, the infirm, the very young and the elderly. State data also show that Black Californians are more likely than those of any other race to die from heat, and people over the age of 65 are especially at risk.
People die in stifling homes, apartments and trailers they can't afford to air-condition. They collapse while working in the sun at jobs they can't afford to lose. What for some is a nuisance is for others a threat to survival.
"Heat in particular is something that people with more resources and privilege can insulate themselves from -- literally," said Elizabeth Rhoades, who directs the L.A. County health department's climate change and sustainability program. "People who have air conditioning, people who have jobs that don't require them to be outside or in a hot warehouse can view a heat wave a little more like a mild inconvenience rather than the life-threatening event it could be."
In 2013, a group of state agencies, led by the Department of Public Health and California Environmental Protection Agency, issued more than 40 recommendations to prepare for extreme heat. Years later, the state has taken little of its own advice, including that the health department "improve the timeliness" of death surveillance during heat waves.
A state health department spokesman said the agency is still working on those recommendations and has made progress on six of them.
When California's worst heat wave in more than 50 years struck in 2006, killing an estimated 650 people and overwhelming hospitals, it should have been a wake-up call, said Paul English, who worked as an environmental epidemiologist for the state health agency for more than two decades before retiring this year. Instead, he said, requests from within the agency for funding to monitor heat-related deaths and illnesses in real time were denied.
The department is "mostly driven by the crisis of the moment," said English, who now works for the Public Health Institute, a nonprofit group. "Timely information is really important, but the system to track statewide deaths and ER visits in real time has not been developed."
California's public health department declined to make its director, Dr. Tomas Aragon, available for an interview. In an email, agency spokesman Matt Conens wrote that the state health department, as well as county and city agencies, issues heat warnings and uses notification systems to protect the public. He said there is no requirement for the agency to collect real-time information on heat illness.
"Promoting awareness of and prevention of heat-related morbidity and mortality continues to be a priority," he wrote.
Gov. Gavin Newsom's administration acknowledges that state agencies haven't done enough to prepare for extreme heat.
Newsom's senior climate advisor, Lauren Sanchez, said a lack of funding and urgency prevented the state from carrying out many of its 2013 recommendations. She said the administration is now working on a new strategy and has set aside hundreds of millions of dollars to respond to worsening heat waves.
Sanchez said the administration's actions are informed by climate science "on heat that specifically means the state needs to be doing so much more to protect Californians," adding that the deaths from recent heat waves have "definitely underscored our urgency."
Yet more than a year after California was struck by two of the most severe heat waves in its history, there has been no official inquiry into how many people perished.
On Sept. 6, 2020, the temperature reached 121 degrees in Woodland Hills -- a record high for L.A. County. Twenty-five miles away in Huntington Park, researchers measured the temperature of the living room in a family's non-air-conditioned duplex at 107.4 degrees, hotter than it was outside.
Emergency room visits soared to nearly 10 times their normal number, and deaths spiked, according to county health officials. Seven people in L.A. County were found dead from heat-related causes on sidewalks, in cars and on bus benches, according to coroner reports. Most had been living on the streets, including three men found within hours of one another in the skid row area of downtown L.A.
The day before, when the temperature in Malibu Creek State Park topped 103 degrees, a healthy 48-year-old woman collapsed while hiking and died of heatstroke.
After most natural disasters comes a reckoning. There are public displays of grief and impromptu memorials. Experts write accounts of what happened, and there is an official death toll. But after 2020's deadly heat waves, there was silence. If there is an accounting, it will be up to scientists to piece together -- and it could take years.
California's lag in reporting data on heat-related illness and death is not just an administrative problem. It contributes to the loss of life by delaying effective, targeted responses during heat emergencies, said Edith B. de Guzman, a UCLA researcher who studies how to mitigate the effects of extreme temperatures on L.A. neighborhoods.
"Heat vulnerability is not the same in every neighborhood, and every heat wave is different," De Guzman said.
"If we don't know which communities are dying or showing up at the hospital disproportionately, we cannot have an informed response, and we end up losing people," she said. "Our hands are tied if we get the data three or five years later."
--
A hidden toll
No one can say exactly how many Americans lose their lives to heat each year. Death certificates aren't perfect, and it's common for doctors and coroners to write that a person suffered a heart attack or kidney failure without knowing whether extreme heat played a part.
Using death records, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that about 700 people nationwide die from heat-related causes annually. But scientists have established that the number of deaths attributable to heat is much higher. A study published last year in the journal Environmental Epidemiology found that in the 297 most populous counties in the U.S., at least 5,600 deaths annually might be caused by heat.
California stands apart because the death toll is climbing here at a time when it is either flat or falling in most of the U.S. A 2020 study in the journal Weather, Climate, and Society found that, over the last decade, heat-related deaths have increased in major metropolitan areas along the Pacific Coast among men and women over the age of 45. Several other cities in the South and Southwest have experienced a similar increase.
What's driving the surge is unclear. The study's authors suggest that while Americans are more aware of heat's dangers, and air conditioning is more common than it was a decade ago, an increase in the number of heat waves may have overtaken these advances.
Getting an accurate picture of extreme heat's toll requires a statistical approach that goes beyond simply tallying the number of death certificates that list heat as a cause of death.
In consultation with several experts, The Times used a similar approach to the methodology that public health researchers turn to when official statistics appear to undercount deaths.
Instead of looking at fatalities directly attributed to heat, The Times analyzed state records of deaths from all causes from 2010 to 2019. The analysis compared the total number of people who died in California on days when temperatures were at their highest -- in the 95th percentile or above -- to the number of deaths that would be expected given mortality trends over the same period of time. The difference between the number of deaths that occurred on extremely hot days and the number expected under normal conditions is what scientists call "excess deaths."
A spokesman for the California Department of Public Health did not dispute The Times' results. He described the type of statistical analysis the newspaper used as one of two methods that "measure different outcomes and will yield different results."
Counting deaths is slow. It can take months for public health officials to verify the information in death records and longer still to finalize the data. Monitoring emergency department visits and hospitalizations for heat-related illnesses is a much faster way for state and local health officials to stay on top of dangerous heat waves.
Yet the state health department doesn't collect real-time data on heat illness from hospitals, as it does for influenza. It also doesn't mandate that county health departments track and report incidents of heat illness, though an agency spokesman said this is within its power. So at a time when local agencies are often underfunded and thinly staffed, many don't monitor hospital data for a known threat.
In Southern California, the counties that do pay attention don't like what they're seeing.
Numbers from the L.A. County Department of Public Health show heat-related emergency department visits have risen in every area of the county since it began measuring in 2005, with the greatest increases in the hottest places: the Antelope and San Fernando valleys.
The same trend holds in San Diego County, where health officials have documented a gradual increase in emergency visits for heat illness or injury since 2006.
Even some inland counties whose residents are used to triple-digit temperatures have not escaped the surge. Imperial County hospitals reported almost as many cases of heat-related illness over six weeks this summer as they recorded in all of 2015. In a county afflicted with poverty and high rates of diabetes, asthma and other chronic diseases, extreme heat had claimed the lives of 22 people by late September.
--
Abandoned in the heat
In 2011, Cathy Bedwell noticed something was a little off with her mother, Anne Gacambi Methu. The proud and sometimes fearsome family matriarch had a reputation as a "perfect, perfect" driver, her daughter said. Yet she had somehow racked up about $3,000 in tickets from running red lights.
A neurologist delivered the dreaded diagnosis: Methu, then in her 60s, was suffering from early-onset Alzheimer's.
The disease came for her sense of balance first. Then it came for her self-control, provoking outbursts and aggression. Alzheimer's eventually stole most of Methu's English, and she began to address people in Swahili. If she didn't have anything to say, she would sing, often in the Kikuyu language of Kiambu, the region of Kenya where she grew up.
Methu moved into the Gardens of Riverside, an assisted living facility that seemed like an ideal arrangement at first. But as time went on, her five children, most of whom have worked in healthcare, grew concerned that she wasn't getting enough attention.
"How are you keeping the residents hydrated?" Bedwell recalls asking the staff at a meeting. "To me it seems like these people are not drinking enough water."
Bedwell began bringing a liter of water with her on weekly visits, sitting by her mother's side until Methu emptied the bottle. But her small interventions became impossible early in 2020, when the pandemic forced the facility to bar visitors.
On Sept. 5 of last year, Bedwell's phone rang just before 9 p.m. She had planned to see her mother that day -- one of many fleeting window visits in which she sat outside and waved through the glass -- but had been dissuaded by the oppressive heat wave that had descended on Southern California. Emergency alerts had gone out warning people to stay indoors. Now the facility's administrator was calling her.
"She told me they attempted to do CPR. I said, 'What are you saying? Are you saying my mom is dead?' "
Two of Bedwell's siblings raced to the center. They stood outside, unable to get any closer until staff from the coroner's office had completed their work. It was only later they learned, from a coroner's report, that their mother had died of heat exposure after the facility allowed her to wander for hours in an exposed courtyard on a 118-degree day. When questioned by police officers, the staff said they didn't know if she had consumed any water that day. "In addition," the investigation said, "staff reported they were unable to keep residents inside the facility at all times."
More than a year later, Methu's children still struggle to explain to relatives in Kenya how their 70-year-old mother died this way in America. The family is preparing to sue the Gardens of Riverside for negligence. A lawyer for the facility declined to comment on the case.
Methu's children are still trying to get over the shock of losing their mother. She had cared for others for most of her working life in this country, first as a home healthcare aide, then as a certified nurse's assistant. Her children said she doted on her elderly patients. Why, they wondered, did our mother have to suffer? How could someone so vulnerable be left to bake in the sun?
"It almost seems like she didn't matter," said Aimee Jones, Methu's youngest child. "Like she's one of the forgotten people."
--
Invisible deaths
One sign that people are getting into serious trouble with heat is that they become confused.
That's one of the reasons heat is so insidious. It disables people's ability to sense that they are in danger.
To maintain a healthy temperature, the body redistributes blood flow so that heat moves from the core and the muscles to the skin and out of the body in the form of evaporated sweat. As long as someone drinks water to replace lost fluids, this system works well -- until temperatures climb really high. But the heart must pump harder and faster, which is why most elderly people who die from heat exposure suffer heart attacks or other cardiovascular problems.
Heat exhaustion sets in when the body is still trying to keep cool, but is losing the battle. A person becomes dehydrated, nauseated and somewhat disoriented. Blood pressure falls because there's less fluid in the body, putting a strain on the kidneys and lungs.
Next comes heatstroke, the body's total failure to regulate internal temperature. Sweating stops; the skin becomes cool and clammy. A person might slur one's speech and behave unnaturally. Even if victims get help at this point, cognitive and organ dysfunction can last for years, leaving them at greater risk of death for decades after.
"The more we learn about heat, the more we realize it really is a general stress on the body and can make most medical conditions worse," said Dr. Aaron Bernstein, a pediatrician at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health.
Because heat affects so many organs, heat-related deaths are often recorded as heart failure, stroke or respiratory failure.
That's not the fault of doctors or coroners, said Larry Kalkstein, a Florida-based researcher who studies how weather affects people's health.
"There's no way that they can tell that a heart attack, for example, or a respiratory failure was due to the heat," Kalkstein said. "But we believe that heat is the stressor that puts people over the edge."
The Times requested six years of records from coroner's or medical examiner's offices in every county in California to understand how they investigate heat-related deaths. Some, including L.A., Riverside, San Bernardino and San Diego counties, tally and record them in detail. But many claimed not to have any such cases or said they don't track them.
Hundreds of reports reviewed by The Times revealed stories of desperation and despair.
There were babies and young children left in cars, migrants discovered in the desert and people living in tents and cars.
There were experienced hikers and runners, such as the 57-year-old San Diego County man who was "in excellent health and jogged daily," according to a coroner's report, and died after a mid-morning jog in 90-degree heat. High school students collapsed during football practice, and a young firefighter fell during a training hike and couldn't get back up.
A 63-year-old U.S. Postal Service letter carrier was found dead in the driver's seat of her mail truck in the San Fernando Valley on a 115-degree day. Others in their 30s, 40s and 50s keeled over while mowing lawns, fixing pools or installing sprinklers.
Diabetes, heart disease, obesity, hypertension and other conditions figured in many of the reports, as did the ravages of mental illness and drug addiction. Some families were told the cause of death was heatstroke or "exposure to excessive natural heat."
Jorge Valerio-Santiago's death in August of last year haunts his son, a construction foreman who often hired his father onto work crews with men half his age. When he saw his father just a few days before his death, Jorge Valerio was shocked. The father he knew -- an indomitable man with a round belly and a thin, graying mustache -- had lost a frightening amount of weight.
"You're looking skinny. Is it too hot?" he recalls asking. But Valerio-Santiago batted away his concerns.
Valerio-Santiago had always worked outdoors at tough jobs. He had fathered three children, lost his wife to childbirth-related causes, raised one of his daughters largely on his own and immigrated to the U.S. from Mexico. After so many years of soldiering on, there wasn't much he couldn't bear.
"My dad was a hard worker," Valerio said. "Even if it was hot, he needed to finish his eight hours. Even if he was sick, he would say 'I'm not going to quit.' "
Still, the thought of his father working in blistering temperatures nagged at him. Authorities had extended an excessive-heat warning that had been issued days before. Even where Valerio was working in Escondido, where the weather was milder, conditions had become so unbearable that he sent his crew home early. There was no question things were worse for his father in Desert Hot Springs.
--
Behind on reducing risks
California's lack of action contrasts with other states and countries.
Arizona has been closely tracking a major increase in deaths from heat and holds regular statewide meetings to discuss trends in the data. New York City posts online, in near-real time, the number of heat-related emergency room visits and has given away tens of thousands of free air conditioners to protect seniors stuck indoors during the pandemic.
After a devastating 2003 heat wave killed more than 15,000 of its people, France launched an aggressive national heat wave plan with a color-coded alert system that, along with other measures, has been credited with dramatically reducing the death toll of subsequent heat waves.
California and the United States have taken some recent steps to better protect the public and workers.
The Biden administration in September launched a governmentwide effort to confront extreme heat that includes the development of federal workplace safety standards and the expansion of programs that help low-income families purchase and run air conditioners.
In Sacramento, state lawmakers recently set aside $800 million for extreme heat in a $15-billion climate spending package. The money will be used over the next three years for projects such as modern cooling centers, tree planting, heat-reflecting roofs and pavement, and establishing a new grant program within the governor's office to help communities adapt.
State Assemblywoman Luz Rivas (D-North Hollywood), who pushed for those changes, grew up in one of the hottest areas of L.A., the northeast San Fernando Valley, and worked in Chicago during the historic 1995 heat wave that killed hundreds. She lamented that as a California lawmaker she has no solid numbers on how many people in her district fell ill or died from extreme temperatures this year.
"Heat is one of climate change's most urgent and deadliest impacts," Rivas said. "We need to make sure that we're prepared."
Sanchez, Newsom's climate advisor, said the governor will continue to prioritize the threat in his budget, public statements and regulatory action. She said the state's track record of work on climate change and air pollution demonstrates "we can mobilize pretty quickly and advance this agenda."
Despite those pledges, researchers and public health advocates say California could be taking more concrete steps to prevent heat deaths and hospitalizations, enhance public warnings and better protect those who work in hot settings.
A state-commissioned study being released later this year by UCLA's Luskin Center for Innovation found significant gaps in California's policies. It described the state's regulation of extreme heat exposure as "fragmented across numerous state agencies" and "with no centrally-responsible authority."
Though California has a heat illness prevention regulation for outdoor workers, and rules designed to limit heat exposure in assisted living and child-care facilities, the extent of compliance and monitoring is unclear. Assisted living facilities and child-care centers are subject to temperature limits established by the state and are inspected regularly, but UCLA researchers who reviewed publicly available inspection reports couldn't find consistent documentation of temperature readings.
To date, California has not adopted heat exposure rules for people in other situations, such as in schools, jails and prisons. Landlords in California are required to make rental housing units "habitable" by providing heating, but there is no requirement for cooling.
On the local level, L.A. is trying to cool neighbor- hoods with trees, has adopted standards for reflective roofs and is experimenting with lighter-colored pavement on some streets.
Yet such local projects are sporadic, and they occur separately from any state or national strategy to reduce fatalities from high temperatures. Overall, California spends far less on heat protection than it does on less deadly threats, including wildfires, floods and water shortages.
"The progress has been opportunistic and patchwork," said Kurt Shickman, executive director of the Global Cool Cities Alliance, a nonprofit that advocates for measures to alleviate extreme heat. "Heat is an area where California can be a leader again. It just hasn't materialized yet."
--
Brutal heat forecast to intensify
In late June, a mass of hot air planted itself over British Columbia and the Pacific Northwest, producing the highest temperature ever recorded in Canada -- 121.3 degrees. After the "heat dome" dissipated, authorities reported a death toll of nearly 800 people in Canada and the United States.
The deadly heat demonstrated that nearly any place is vulnerable -- from the rainforests of Washington's Olympic National Park to California's temperate coastal areas.
Scientists studying the event found it would have been "virtually impossible" without human-induced climate change and warned that catastrophic heat spells like it, which used to be extraordinarily rare, will become more commonplace as global warming accelerates.
Fueling these fiercer heat waves are rising greenhouse gas emissions, which have increased temperatures in California by 1 to 2 degrees since the beginning of the 20th century.
By 2050, researchers project the number of days above 95 degrees in L.A. and other cities could double, triple or even quadruple. How bad it gets ultimately depends on how much more greenhouse gas pollution humans spew into the atmosphere.
Projections by researchers with the Climate Impact Lab rank California behind only Arizona and Texas in how deadly an overheating planet will probably be for its population by mid-century. People living in L.A., Orange, Riverside and Imperial counties could find themselves in the center of a worsening crisis, as the analysis puts these places in the top 2% of counties nationally for projected increases in heat-related deaths.
Even under a moderate emissions scenario, where global emissions peak around 2040 then start to decline, rising temperatures from climate change could cause thousands of additional deaths annually in California by mid-century, according to the analysis by the Climate Impact Lab, which is made up of more than 30 scientists, economists and researchers from UC Berkeley and other institutions.
That effect would be deadlier than diabetes -- currently the state's seventh leading cause of death -- and nearly as high as the death rate from lung disease at No. 6, according to the analysis.
Whenever extreme temperatures take a life, loved ones are left to ponder what they did, and what they could have done.
Jorge Valerio-Santiago's sudden death last summer devastated his son, who had reminded his father to drink plenty of water and take precautions when working outdoors. But sometimes the old man wouldn't listen. He had bragged about how younger workers couldn't keep up with him.
At home in Desert Hot Springs, Jorge Valerio recalled the day his father died. His voice trailed off as he fought the urge to cry. Occasionally, he would glance at the corner of the living room where his father's ashes sat atop a bookshelf, next to an orchid.
Valerio feels he did everything he could to warn his father, but he's more vigilant now. He makes sure his employees take breaks and drink water. He recently pulled aside an older worker to tell him the story of his father's death.
Then he cautioned the man's son: "You better be careful with your dad."
 Graphic



End of Document


THE GREAT CALIFORNIA MIGRATION; Trading big city for high desert; Pandemic-weary L.A. residents searching for more space and clean air also find drawbacks.
Los Angeles Times
October 17, 2021 Sunday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN NEWS; Metro Desk; Part A; Pg. 1
Length: 2499 words
Byline: Sarah Parvini
Dateline:  YUCCA VALLEY, CALIF.  
Body




Tyler Gaul strode across the sprawling backyard of his Yucca Valley home and surveyed the rocky hillside a few steps away from the pool and basketball court that sit atop his 2-acre property.
When he first moved to the desert from Los Angeles last fall, this jagged landscape granted him a sense of serenity as the crowded city he left behind grappled with a pandemic.
Gaul, who runs his own skin care company, knew it was time to move when he could no longer exercise outside his Echo Park apartment -- his respite from stay-at-home orders -- because of wildfire smoke polluting the air. Constant and worsening wildfires, paired with a public health crisis, proved to be too much.
"I have a lung condition, and I was like, 'No, I can't do this anymore,' " he recalled.
So he set out for the desert.
Like many other city dwellers who have fled urban sprawl over the last year and a half, Gaul sought shelter in a more isolated desert community in hopes of finding more space and clean air, and limiting his exposure to the coronavirus. Local real estate agents say that the migration is driven by a desire for affordable housing and large plots of land, a move further propelled by the nation's sudden shift toward teleworking.
Until last year, Gaul hadn't seen himself as the desert type or thought of making an escape from the city. But since moving, he and his girlfriend have hosted pool parties for their friends living in the city; they've learned how to tackle home repairs, like the time there was an irrigation leak; they stood in stillness during their first desert winter and listened as the sound of snow falling off trees pelted the craggy ground below.
"One day, we were in the pool and there was this huge owl, and it just like swept down and looked like a huge, silent airplane. It was just, like, so majestic," Gaul, 35, said as he lifted a plastic cover to check for a tarantula that had recently been roaming the side of his home.
The high desert communities of Yucca Valley, Pioneertown and Joshua Tree about 130 miles east of Los Angeles have been inundated not only with new home buyers but also renters and city folk who come to work remotely at one of the many Airbnbs that have cropped up in recent years -- sometimes to the chagrin of locals who could live without hearing the loud parties, or driving through the dust kicked up by Teslas plowing through dirt roads in a rush that those used to a slower pace of life have trouble understanding.
"It feels like the zeitgeist of the desert," said Tom Murtagh, a Realtor in Twentynine Palms. "It's a time of change. A lot of people here are having a tough time with it and I am very sympathetic. It's a tough situation -- gentrification reached the desert and it's good and bad. There's money to fix things, but it's a double-edged sword."
Although the pandemic accelerated migration to the high desert, the shift was gaining steam in the years before.
Jean Michel Alperin moved to Yucca Valley with his family in 2018. He and his wife, Sarah Scott Alperin, were disappointed with the lack of options in their price range in L.A. despite looking at homes in neighborhoods across the city. Jean Michel was on the brink of helping to revitalize and reopen Pioneertown's Red Dog Saloon and had pondered making the commute to the desert a few days a week for work.
"While I was doing business here for a couple days I decided to see Realtors. We saw four places, and the fourth was the home that we bought. It was one of those dream homes. It seduced me in this very intimate way. Kind of like when you meet somebody, it was a romance," Alperin, 40, said. "It was a total about-face. And it was tough, for sure. There's a lot of differences moving from Echo Park to Yucca."
Alperin said that he doesn't necessarily miss the people he could meet in L.A. -- he's bonded with other transplants from Echo Park here in the desert -- but he does miss the wealth of cafes filled with people poring over books.
"That's kind of the feeling, that there's just one place. You don't have options," he said. "But that's part of coming out here. We're all kind of frontier people."
Three years in, he doesn't regret the move. He and his wife have remodeled their roughly 2,000-square-foot home, whose picture windows and open floor plan sit on 5 acres, converting the garage to a studio and the barn to an office and "mini man cave."
They've made friends with other young transplants who have children the same age as theirs and, in response to the pandemic, have joined a schooling pod where a Montessori teacher comes to instruct the kids. And the Red Dog reopened in August 2020.
Alperin sees the saloon as a job creator in town -- he has about 30 employees, who by his estimate make about 25% more than the highest-paying kitchen jobs in the high desert with tips included.
It's proof, in his eyes, that city transplants can do good in the community.
"At first, we felt like fish out of water," he said. "That very quickly changed ... we built a community. I would say we need to work on diversity. That's where we're lacking now. But it's a good community of people that are from L.A., and like-minded. And we're starting to integrate community as well, which is nice."
Sarah Scott Alperin, an intimacy coordinator who assists TV and film productions in safely filming intimate scenes and who commutes to L.A. for work, said the couple moved just as others from Los Angeles began packing their bags. They watched as Angelenos moved from Echo Park, Silver Lake and parts of the Eastside, and then witnessed the migration turn into a "mad rush" during the pandemic.
But life in the desert doesn't always measure up to the Instagram desert-chic aesthetic of playing guitar by a fire pit at a trendy bungalow or swinging in a hammock against a backdrop of Joshua trees. Last summer, Joshua Tree reached a sweltering 114 degrees; Morongo Valley hit 108.
"The cold, the heat, the bitter dryness -- it's on the extreme," Sarah, 42, said. "There was a week where our 4-year-old said, 'Mom wants to move back,' because it was so freaking hot and unbearable and you can't go out. Or you're hungry one day, and there's nothing around. Shopping is minimal."
And sometimes, locals can be unwelcoming.
"We drive a Prius and we took off the Santa Monica license plate frame. We've heard, 'Go back to L.A.,' " she said.
Last Sunday, she said, the family hosted a potluck for other young couples with children, part of a new roving tradition shared by the roughly 25 moms in a chat group she belongs to.
"There were roughly 40 adults and 20-something kids here and it was like the most joyful thing in the world, but it's funny because we are all transplants," she said. "There was one couple who has a newborn and have been out here at least a decade. We want to be inclusive because we know what it's like to move here and not know anybody."
But one family's inclusion may mean another struggling to buy a home. Some low-income residents here are being priced out of the market, with the resulting community frictions often playing out on social media, Murtagh, the Realtor, said. The problem, he added, is that there is not enough multifamily housing in the desert.
"Rents are going up dramatically," he said. "It's cheap for L.A. but a lot higher than compared to two years ago."
The housing market looks a little different, however. After a large wave of buyers came to town, home prices have started to cool in recent months, said Merl Abel, the mayor of Yucca Valley and a Realtor in the area.
"Some of the frustration of people a few months ago was getting outbid every time they put in an offer. Now people have an opportunity. We're seeing offers of one or two per home, unless it's underpriced," he said. "The fever pitch has sort of leveled off a bit."
The cost of a home in Yucca Valley has risen sharply in the last year, according to data from Zillow. In August 2021, the "typical home value" in Yucca Valley was $314,858 -- an increase of nearly 31% since August 2020, data show. In Joshua Tree, home values have gone up 40.2% over the last year, according to Zillow.
The wave of newcomers over the last few years has also brought a sense of revitalization to the area, Abel added.
"In Old Town Yucca Valley, we have had young people come and open up businesses," he said. "There's a boutique with organic wine and cheese and things like that where people can make a basket and go to the national park. Next to that, they opened a yoga studio. That strip has transformed."
Danny Sall, a builder born and raised in Pipes Canyon in the Pioneertown area, said that he's "receptive" to people moving in from the city, but he finds loud visitors disruptive. He also worries that the cost of housing might become prohibitive to locals hoping to buy, or that the quick jump in real estate prices will give longtime residents an incentive to sell off what they have and leave.
"It's changing the demographics a little bit," Sall, 72, said. "The younger, upper-middle-class hipster from L.A. buys the place, and the old guy with the horse and wife that went out riding two or three times a week are selling out because the price is so high."
Sall grew up on a homestead beside the Pioneertown of old, born just three years after the jumbled boulders and blue skies straight out of a western movie lured the likes of Roy Rogers, Gene Autry and other Hollywood cowboys. The first buildings were fully functional businesses, including a motel, an ice cream parlor, a shooting gallery and the Red Dog Saloon, according to Pioneertown's website.
"I've been expecting it for years," Sall said of the boom in short-term rentals and buyers from the city. "Pioneertown has been our best-kept secret."
One of his biggest concerns, he said, is new transplants "changing the look of the place" by building homes bounded by white fences to match the "stark white" paint on their houses.
"I always built my houses with a roofline that is gray-brown and wood siding that is neutral and blends with the surroundings. They like the house to stand out. They make it contrast with the landscape," he said. "They don't know any better. If you can talk to them and convince them to not change it so much, it's good."
Sall, who lives off a dirt road just outside Pioneertown, said that the latest wave of newcomers is the biggest he's seen in his seven decades living in the desert.
"I don't know where it will end. People keep coming and spending more money," he said. But, having lived here so long, Sall said he'd "have to hate everybody in town" if he took a dislike to every newcomer.
"You can get upset and drive yourself nuts," he said, "but I don't worry about it too much."
For Gaul, the Echo Park transplant, there have also been unexpected drawbacks to desert life. Multiple spaces in his 3,000-square-foot, four-bedroom home have humidifiers to combat the arid climate. The couple have been battling a rat problem plaguing their HVAC system. They long for more restaurant options and more variety in grocery stores. And then there are the power outages that come without warning.
"If we were in a career stage where we were working a lot less, we could sort of savor it. We would enjoy it a lot more like, 'Oh, there's an irrigation leak, let's go do a fun yard project,' " Gaul said. "Right now, we just want the house to work and to not have another rat. We just had our 20th rat removed."
He questions whether this "novel break from L.A. life" is sustainable.
"I was missing the ability to just text my friends and say, 'Hey, I need to decompress, let's grab a drink,' " he said, standing at the edge of his home's indoor-outdoor bar space. "It's harsh living up here."
Sitting at the counter, his girlfriend, Katelynn Rossiter, said she would love to see more outdoor entertainment options in town that would allow the pair to socialize while staying safe.
"We don't really know that many people here," Rossiter, 38, said. "It would be nice to have a larger friend group here. But we have friends coming from L.A. all the time, so I guess it's kind of like a trade-off."
About 20 minutes away, just beyond the border of Yucca Valley, Evanice Holz relished the isolation the desert lifestyle offers. She left her Silver Lake studio and moved to a remote casita summer of last year, after feeling that the pandemic stripped away the connections tethering her to her hometown. Before the virus hit, she would regularly come to the Joshua Tree area to unwind; it seemed like a natural fit for her new home.
"I wanted someplace where I could enjoy nature, where I could enjoy space. I felt really claustrophobic," said Holz, founder of the catering company Senoreata, specializing in plant-based Cuban cuisine. "I was one of the folks during the pandemic who really didn't leave their house unless there was a dire need."
She found the desert home, which has three bedrooms and a greenhouse, a few days into her search for a new place. She moved in within two weeks and brought her business with her. She worked on pickup orders in both L.A. and the high desert throughout the pandemic, later offering catering services at events such as weddings and baby showers in the desert, while also spending weekends in L.A. selling her food at the open-air market Smorgasburg when it reopened.
Sitting at her outdoor dining table atop a hill with sweeping views of the rugged terrain, the 33-year-old said she feels at peace hiking the trails within walking distance of her house and growing the vegetables and herbs on the property.
"I paid about $1,600 [a month] for a studio in Silver Lake. Here, I pay less than that for over an acre of land," she said. "The solitude really helps me appreciate everything and not be susceptible to burning out like I was in L.A., because there's a nice balance between city life and desert calm."
Living in the desert has made the stress of her old life clear. Here, she said, she is content to wake up with the sun every morning. The power outages that take out her well -- and shower, as a result -- don't bother her much. Neither does the spotty internet.
And she's picking up the local lingo.
"My landlord here speaks in different terminology. When I needed something repaired, he said, 'I'll be there when the shadow has left the front of your house,' " she said, laughing. "There have been logistical and cultural things to get used to."
When business picked back up and she was able to set up as a vendor in L.A., Holz said, she felt a moment of anxiety. She wasn't sure if she could make her new life in the desert sync with her city job. She worried she would have to move back. But one month into living in the desert and working in the city on weekends, she realized she had to hold on to what she'd found.
"This whole thing has showed me what really matters," she said, "which is enjoying the short time you have here -- wherever you want to go."
--
This is the second in an occasional series about Californians on the move, both to other states and within the Golden State.
 Graphic



End of Document


What does La Nina mean for California?; The cold pattern is back, and in conditions of extreme drought, it's nothing to cheer about
Los Angeles Times
October 17, 2021 Sunday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: CALIFORNIA; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 1
Length: 908 words
Byline: Paul Duginski
Body




La Nina is back for an encore -- but few Californians are likely to applaud this chilly diva.
Since La Nina cold patterns typically result in a drier-than-average winter in drought-afflicted Southern California, this isn't exactly welcome news. The condition, which influences weather across the United States, has been developing since the summer and has already played a part in a stronger than usual Atlantic hurricane season this year.
La Nina is essentially the opposite of her warm and wet counterpart, El Nino, and is characterized by below-average surface temperatures in the central and east-central equatorial Pacific. Forecasters predict that this La Nina will be moderate in strength and give it an 87% chance of persisting from December to February, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Climate Prediction Center.
This is the second consecutive winter that this phenomenon has developed.
--
What occurs under La Nina conditions?
In addition to below- average surface temperatures in the tropical Pacific, easterly winds over that region strengthen, and rainfall usually decreases over the central and eastern tropical Pacific and increases over the western Pacific, Indonesia and the Philippines.
La Ninas usually weaken wind shear in the Caribbean and tropical Atlantic, contributing to increased hurricane activity in the Atlantic Basin.
--
What should we expect in Southern California?
There are numerous global climate factors involved in predicting precipitation, but La Nina patterns are typically associated with cold, stormy conditions and increased precipitation across the northern parts of the United States, and warmer, drier and less stormy conditions in the southern portions of the country.
California and much of the West continues to be gripped by extreme or exceptional drought, according to the most recent U.S. Drought Monitor data. The region needs precipitation to recharge soil moisture and increase groundwater levels, stream flows and reservoir levels, according to the Drought Monitor's scientists.
This is especially true after a summer characterized by extreme heat -- in fact, it was California's hottest summer ever recorded.
Climate scientist Daniel Swain tweeted on Wednesday that California's current drought is worse than that of 2014-15, making it the worst drought on record since the late 1800s.
--
Are La Nina winters always dry?
The short answer is: not necessarily.
But Bill Patzert, a retired climate scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory who has studied the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) for four decades, says the deck is probably stacked for another dry year.
The ENSO climate phenomenon has three phases: El Nino, a warming of the ocean surface; its opposite, La Nina, a cooling of the ocean surface; and a neutral phase in between. These ocean temperature changes are coupled with changes to the atmosphere and winds.
Patzert uses annual rainfall figures (July to June) for downtown Los Angeles to represent Southern California in his research, since the downtown figures go back the farthest. El Nino and La Nina were not well documented before 1950, so he looked at the last 72 rainfall years -- that's 1949-50 through 2020-21.
During that time, there were 25 La Ninas and 26 El Ninos -- so they occurred with about equal frequency.
The average rainfall for La Nina years is 11.64 inches. The long-term average dating back to 1878 in downtown L.A. is just shy of 15 inches. Last winter, during a moderate La Nina, downtown received only 5.82 inches of rain.
In 10 of the 25 La Nina years, downtown received less than 10 inches, so some of L.A.'s driest years have occurred during La Ninas.
In only four La Nina years has downtown L.A. received above-average precipitation. So it's rare, but it can happen.
The wettest La Nina year was 2011, when downtown scored 20.20 inches of rain. In 2017, there were 19 inches of rain, and that was during a weak La Nina. In 2016, only 9.6 inches fell, and that was during a strong El Nino.
Repeating La Ninas are not uncommon and occurred most recently in 1973-75, 1998-2000 and 2007-09. Repeating La Ninas often follow El Ninos.
So El Ninos and La Ninas can be pretty unpredictable, Patzert said, "but the statistics favor drier La Ninas and wetter El Ninos, which is not good news for water managers, farmers and firefighters."
--
How do scientists study La Nina conditions?
Scientists at JPL in La Canada Flintridge study the ENSO phenomenon with satellite technology that detects the height of water in the Pacific Ocean.
Water expands when it's warmer, so the surface of the ocean is higher. When water is colder, it contracts, and the surface is lower. (In satellite imagery, taller-than-normal heights are shown in yellow and red, while lower heights are shown in blue and purple. Green indicates what is close to normal.)
Currently, the cool La Nina water along the equator is 3 to 6 inches lower than normal.
--
What does this mean going forward?
There are no guarantees, Patzert said, but "conditions are ripe for a stormy, wet winter in the Pacific Northwest and a dry, relatively rainless winter in Southern California, the Southwest and the southern tier of the United States."
ENSO is not fully understood, and numerous other factors play a role in global climate.
But when it comes to those effects on climate, the Pacific Ocean is the 800-pound gorilla.
As Patzert likes to say, "When the Pacific speaks, we all should listen."
 Graphic



 
GRAPHIC: What a La Nina winter typically looks like  CREDIT:Paul Duginski Los Angeles Times GRAPHIC: (no caption)  CREDIT:NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory and Los Angeles Times GRAPHIC: U.S. drought conditions  CREDIT:Paul Duginski Los Angeles Times 
Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Infographic
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: EL NINO & LA NINA (99%); WEATHER (91%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); HURRICANES (90%); OCEANOGRAPHIC & ATMOSPHERIC SERVICES (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (89%); DROUGHT (89%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (89%); EXTREME TEMPERATURES (89%); SEVERE SUMMER WEATHER (89%); OCEANS (88%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (88%); WATER RESOURCES (77%); TROPICAL STORMS (76%); OCEANOGRAPHY (73%); AEROSPACE RESEARCH (66%); CALIFORNIA (%); WEATHER FORECASTING (%); LA NINA (%); WEATHER (%)
 Organization: JET PROPULSION LABORATORY (59%); NATIONAL OCEANIC & ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION (56%)
 Industry: AEROSPACE RESEARCH (66%)
 Geographic: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); ATLANTIC OCEAN (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); CARIBBEAN ISLANDS (79%); PHILIPPINES (79%); INDONESIA (75%)
 Load-Date: October 17, 2021

 

End of Document
CAPITOL JOURNAL; As state burns, politicians mostly fiddle; Internal squabbles, budget worries and a failure to prioritize hamper wildfire fight.
Los Angeles Times
October 18, 2021 Monday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: CALIFORNIA; Local Desk; Part B; Pg. 1
Length: 958 words
Byline: GEORGE SKELTON
Dateline:  IN SACRAMENTO  
Body




Wildfires have always menaced California, and that will never stop, especially with climate warming. What we can do is make them more controllable and less catastrophic.
That's what Gov. Gavin Newsom and the Legislature are attempting to achieve -- a bit belatedly -- by pouring unprecedented amounts of money into fire prevention.
Sacramento should have been doing this a long time ago. Blame internal squabbles, budget worries and a failure to prioritize the wildfire threat.
Don't look for dramatic progress by the next fire season, although there should be incremental improvements. Given how far behind California is in addressing the wildfire challenge, and the natural snail's pace of government -- an agonizing trait of virtually any government -- this will take many years of consistent effort and tanker loads of tax dollars.
There's a sense in Sacramento of inevitability about major wildfires. Brush fires such as the Alisal blaze in Santa Barbara County have raged forever along the Southern California coast. The hills above Malibu are periodically torched.
But there's also optimism that the fires can be made less horrific than the blazes that have destroyed tens of thousands of homes and entire towns in recent years.
"The good news is we actually know how to make California's ecology climate-resistant. We're not just sitting back and saying, 'Good luck,' " says Jessica Morse, deputy secretary for Forest and Wildland Resilience at the state Natural Resources Agency.
Morse is a fifth-generation Californian whose family helped settle the tiny, historic, pine-forested mining town of Gold Run in the Sierra east of Sacramento. She grew up there. For her, wildfires are "personal, emotional and serious," she says.
Personally, I'm sick of hearing politicians -- starting with Newsom -- immediately blame climate change for our wildfire devastation. It comes across as: "Not my fault. Didn't happen on my shift."
Well, it is their shift now. What are they doing about it? Certainly, climate change exacerbates wildfires by drying out vegetation and making the blazes hotter and more volatile.
But, as Morse told me, "the climate crisis is not going to reverse overnight."
We must cope with the wildfire threat that exists today, not just use it as a talking point to whip up public support for slowing climate change. That's what Newsom seems to do.
That said, 2021 has been a banner year for legislative and gubernatorial action on preventing and fighting wildfires.
"We've finally put our money where our mouth is," says state Sen. Bill Dodd (D-Napa), whose wine country district north of San Francisco has been hit hard by wildfires. He's a leader on fire legislation.
"Last year, we spent $3 billion on fire suppression and $100 million on fire prevention. That just doesn't do it," Dodd says. "This year we're going to spend $3 billion on suppression and $1.5 billion on prevention."
The prevention money will go toward a smorgasbord of projects.
One sorely needed project is thinning dense forests by removing highly flammable dead trees and thick underbrush.
Much of this thinning is carried out by so-called prescribed burning -- what Indigenous Californians did to keep the forests healthy until Europeans shoved them aside and began dousing every small blaze to protect settlements and marketable timber.
"California's ecology was managed beautifully for millennia," Morse says. "Then the West was colonized. ... As a result of multi-generation decisions and climate change, we're now seeing catastrophic megafires."
California forests became overgrown with people, pines and undergrowth. The dense trees became susceptible to disease -- bark beetles in a drought -- and nearly 170 million now are dead, creating hot-burning fire fuel.
Both the state and federal governments have been slow to respond to the modern reality that forests need to be periodically cleaned.
"We had a goal last year of treating 500,000 acres but only did about 60,000," Dodd says.
Newsom signed a Dodd bill that will protect landowners from liability if prescribed burns on their forested property get out of control.
The record state spending also will be used to create cleared-out spaces -- called "fuel breaks" -- around forested communities where firefighters can safely place their equipment and battle blazes. Fuel breaks are credited with helping to save South Lake Tahoe in August.
The money also will provide grants for homeowners to create vegetation-light buffers -- "defensible space" -- next to their vulnerable houses.
There'll be grants for "home hardening," such as installing double-pane windows and finally getting rid of those wood-shingle roofs.
"This is a cultural thing," says Thom Porter, chief of the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection. "We're seeing fires that we've never seen in history, like redwoods burning because they're so dry. We need to embrace that fact and prepare our communities to be resilient.
"It's for certain going to cost a ton of money and require sustained activity."
Another Dodd bill signed by Newsom will create a new Office of Wildfire Technology Research to test better equipment and retardants.
"We're behind the curve on this," Dodd says.
As of Friday, roughly 2.5 million acres had been burned in California this year by more than 8,000 fires, dooming 3,600 structures. Last year, 4.3 million acres were burned and nearly 10,500 structures destroyed.
Reducing the wildfire threat should be state government's top priority. It's about public safety, shattered lives, crippled local economies, toxic smoky skies, and greenhouse emissions making climate warming even worse.
These last few years cannot become the status quo. That's unacceptable. The public needs to hold the politicians' feet to the fire.
 Graphic



End of Document


Farmers paid for fallow fields; As Colorado River levels drop amid severe drought, agencies look to expand water-saving programs
Los Angeles Times
October 17, 2021 Sunday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN NEWS; Metro Desk; Part A; Pg. 1
Length: 2367 words
Byline: Ian James
Dateline:  BLYTHE, CALIF.  
Body




Green fields of alfalfa and cotton rolled past as Brad Robinson drove through the desert valley where his family has farmed with water from the Colorado River for three generations. Stopping the truck, he stepped onto a dry, brown field where shriveled remnants of alfalfa crunched under his boots.
The water has been temporarily shut off on a portion of Robinson's land. In exchange, he's receiving $909 this year for each acre of farmland left dry and unplanted. The water is instead staying in Lake Mead, near Las Vegas, to help slow the unrelenting decline of the largest reservoir in the country.
Robinson and other growers in the Palo Verde Irrigation District are taking part in a new $38-million program funded by the federal Bureau of Reclamation, the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California and other water agencies in Arizona and Nevada. The farmers are paid to leave a portion of their lands dry and fallow; the water saved over the next three years is expected to translate into 3 feet of additional water in Lake Mead, which has declined to its lowest levels since it was filled in the 1930s, after the construction of the Hoover Dam.
"Honestly, I think I could make more money farming. But for the sake of the Colorado River, I think it's the right thing to do," Robinson said. "The river's going through a bad time right now."
The arrangement is one of a growing number of programs that are springing up along the river to find water savings in agricultural areas. As reservoirs continue to decline, managers of water districts are looking to start or scale up similar land-fallowing programs in other areas, paying farmers not to farm temporarily on some fields and using the water to ease shortages.
Although the program in the Palo Verde Valley amounts to a minuscule boost for the shrinking Colorado River, the approach has been praised by water officials and local growers as one way of adapting to a river that yields less after years of severe drought intensified by the warming climate.
Robinson and other growers in Palo Verde say they hope their participation may encourage other water agencies to start similar initiatives and enlist more farmers to fallow their land to help address the increasingly dire condition of the river.
Even as they take part in the program, some farmers remain suspicious of the powerful Metropolitan Water District and its intentions in their community.
The MWD has bought thousands of acres of farmland around the town of Blythe over the years and recently agreed to buy more land, eliciting fears among farmers that the water agency in Los Angeles could one day seek to take more water and dry up a larger portion of their valley.
"They've got a large portion of this valley. Why do they need more?" asked farmer Charles Van Dyke.
The Colorado River has been chronically over-allocated, with so much water diverted to supply farms and cities that the river for decades has rarely reached the sea in Mexico. Most of that diverted water -- approximately 70% -- irrigates farmland; much of it flows to thirsty crops such as hay and cotton, which are exported in large quantities.
Since 2000, the river's flow has shrunk during one of the driest 22-year periods in centuries.
Scientists have described the last two decades as a megadrought, one that's being worsened by the heating of the planet from the burning of fossil fuels.
Researchers warn that long-term "aridification" of the Colorado River Basin means the region must adapt to a river that provides less water.
The water level in Lake Mead has declined 27 feet since January 2020. The reservoir now stands at just 34% of capacity, placing it at a shortage level that will trigger mandatory water cutbacks next year for Arizona, Nevada and Mexico.
The lake's water level is projected to continue falling. The latest estimates from the federal government show that the water in Lake Mead could drop an additional 30 feet by August 2023, a level that would require water cuts in California.
Since 2005, Robinson and other farmers in the Palo Verde Valley have left portions of their lands dry and unplanted under a 35-year deal with the Metropolitan Water District, which has paid them more than $180 million for water that was sent flowing through the Colorado River Aqueduct to cities in Southern California. Under the new deal, much of the water will be left in Lake Mead to try to reduce the risk of the reservoir falling to critically low levels.
For managers of the MWD, the program offers flexibility, enabling them to pay for more land fallowing in years when they need more water.
Each year, the MWD calls for a certain percentage of the valley's farmland, capped at 28%, to be left fallow. Starting this year, the water from a portion of those lands is staying in Lake Mead.
Similar programs have taken shape in several areas along the Colorado River.
Last year, the MWD began paying farmers in the smaller Bard Water District not to plant water-intensive crops such as alfalfa in the spring and summer, while they continue growing higher-value winter crops such as lettuce, broccoli and cauliflower.
And the MWD's board is considering paying for seasonal fallowing under another proposed agreement with the Quechan Indian Tribe, whose reservation borders Arizona, California and Mexico and includes farms that produce hay and vegetable crops.
Other initiatives are underway across the river in Arizona. Under agreements aimed at slowing the decline of Lake Mead, leaders of the Colorado River Indian Tribes have been leaving some farmlands dry, and landowners in the Mohave Valley Irrigation and Drainage District have been forgoing some water in exchange for payments.
To support more fallowing of land in the Palo Verde Valley, the federal government is contributing half the funding -- $19 million -- while the rest is coming from the Central Arizona Project, the Southern Nevada Water Authority and the MWD.
"This is just the beginning," MWD General Manager Adel Hagekhalil said when the deal was announced in August. "We're working to develop other innovative ideas to keep as much water as possible in Lake Mead."
The program demonstrates how urban and agricultural water districts can work together to deal with shortages, said Bill Hasencamp, MWD's manager of Colorado River resources.
"A lot of other states and other regions are looking to those programs as examples of what can be done elsewhere," Hasencamp said. "We want to set a good example of how farmland can be productive in the era of shrinking water supplies."
Reducing reliance on the Colorado River, he said, will require more stringent water-saving efforts in cities and farming communities alike.
The MWD supplies water to cities and water districts across Southern California that serve about 19 million people. The agency's figures show that between 2011 and 2020, its water use declined about 7% -- in part thanks to the lasting effects of conservation campaigns during the 2012-2016 drought.
Because the latest estimates show Lake Mead is likely to continue declining, Hasencamp said, "we're going to need to do more."
Robinson, who is a board member of the Palo Verde Irrigation District, runs a family business that his grandfather founded in 1960. He now farms on about 3,200 acres around Blythe, including land he owns and leases. His fields produce cotton that is exported, alfalfa that is trucked to dairies in California, Bermuda grass that is baled to feed horses and honeydews and other melons that are sold in supermarkets.
"In a perfect world, a farmer wants to farm," Robinson said. "But the reality of the situation is that we have a certain amount of population and people, and don't have unlimited water. So ... the two sides are going to have to work together."
The fields that are left dry are rotated every one to five years. And for the farmers, the cash payments provide a stable chunk of income that isn't subject to price swings.
"We're not getting rich off this," Robinson said, "but it helps enough in the bad years," when crop prices are low. "I've never laid anybody off because of the fallow program, and I never intend to do so."
The program is far from a cure-all and will need to be combined with other steps, said Chuck Cullom, manager of Colorado River programs at the Central Arizona Project. For example, water agencies in Arizona and Nevada have offered to invest in a proposed water recycling project in Southern California. And Cullom's agency has been investing in testing water-saving irrigation technologies on Arizona farms.
"We all share the river. We all share risk," Cullom said. "As the system becomes more vulnerable, we need all of the sectors to work together."
The sorts of deals that temporarily leave farmland dry help by adding flexibility to the water system, but they also raise questions as the West grapples with the effects of climate change, including hotter, more intense droughts, said Newsha Ajami, director of urban water policy at Stanford University.
"If you're experiencing drought after drought, and the droughts are getting hotter and drier, how long can you fallow land?" Ajami said. "I think it's a Band-Aid. It's a temporary solution to a more long-term problem we are having."
Some Arizona farmers are already facing cutbacks in water deliveries from the river because they hold the lowest-priority water rights.
The farmers in Blythe, in contrast, hold some of the oldest water rights, dating to 1877, when investor Thomas Blythe filed a claim to use water from the river. Based on that history, the growers of the Palo Verde Valley have a first-priority position among California water districts and would be among the last in line for cuts.
"We should be the last ones to worry about water," said Bart Fisher, a farmer who is vice president of the irrigation district board. "But if there's no water in the river, it really doesn't matter."
Fisher, who runs a farming business that his grandfather founded in 1917, said even with those solid rights, he and other growers have reason to be concerned about the river's worsening crisis.
"It looks grim, actually. I was born in Blythe, and I've been here all my life, and we've never been so threatened," Fisher said, looking across a dry field where bits of garlic, remnants of the last harvest, were scattered in the soil.
He also grows broccoli, melons, wheat and hay, all of which rely on Colorado River water flowing through the canals.
"We could conceivably come to a place on the Colorado River where there is not water for anybody's needs," Fisher said. "We're going to diminish reservoir levels to levels that we haven't seen before, and the question then is, how do we respond?"
He said he hopes to see more deals emerge. If four or five other agricultural water districts pitch in, he said, their contributions could quickly add up to 10 or 15 feet of water in Lake Mead, which would make a big difference.
But even as Fisher and other farmers continue to participate in the MWD program and receive payments, they've voiced concerns.
Under the deal, the MWD provided $6 million to establish a locally run community improvement fund in Blythe that has provided grants and business loans in an effort to boost the local economy.
In retrospect, Fisher said, that one-time payment hasn't been enough.
Fisher drove down the main avenue, Hobsonway, where he passed shuttered businesses, including a motel, gas station, restaurant and several stores, all with boarded-up windows.
"I think we would do it a little differently today," Fisher said. "We would ask for more community support" from the MWD.
To the farmers' dismay, the MWD has bought large pieces of farmland in the Palo Verde Valley. The largest purchase, 12,000 acres in 2015, made the MWD the largest landowner in the irrigation district. The MWD says it now owns about 29,000 acres in the area.
The agency leases the land that isn't left dry to growers, offering reduced rent to farmers who plant crops that consume less water.
The problem with the MWD owning so much land, Fisher said, is that it ends up paying less to landowners in the valley. He said this deprives the area of $6 million to $8 million annually that would otherwise be going to local businesses and fueling the economy.
"When [the MWD] fallows their own land, they keep the money. So it doesn't make its way into our community. And it's a lot for a little community like this," Fisher said.
Worried by the MWD's land dealings, leaders of the Palo Verde Irrigation District sued the agency in 2017but dropped the lawsuit the following year.
Recently, farmers objected when they learned of an MWD proposal to buy an additional 702-acre property from Cox Family Farms. The MWD board endorsed the purchase last month.
"We've told them that we think it's a very bad idea. It's bad for the community, and frankly, it's a predatory practice on their part," Fisher said.
"It's just disappointing. It's sort of counter to the spirit by which we originally engaged with them to negotiate the fallow program."
At the MWD, however, officials have discussed the potential for additional purchases of farmland along the river in areas with high-priority senior rights as a way to reduce water use in agriculture and free it up for urban Southern California in dry times.
"It would allow us to play a long game with climate change by holding and leasing land for decades," Brad Coffey, manager of water resources management, said during a September committee meeting.
Board members discussed whether to actively pursue future land purchases.
"I believe that if someone wants to sell us that land, that we should always answer the door," board member Larry Dick said. "We'll do it responsibly. We're not going to take that land and take it out of production forever."
Russell Lefevre, another board member, asked how the land purchases are viewed by the farmers.
"They did express concern about us buying land," said Hasencamp, MWD's manager of Colorado River resources. "We are working with them to try to alleviate some of those concerns."
Lefevre said he would support seeking out other land deals.
He said he wonders "if we can move this methodology to other areas," such as the Coachella and Imperial valleys.
 Graphic



End of Document


More warehouse workers toiling in extreme heat; Temperatures at facilities can hover above 90 degrees for hours; state officials have not yet finalized regulations
Los Angeles Times
October 12, 2021 Tuesday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 1
Length: 3228 words
Byline: Anna M. Phillips
Body




When Rite Aid Corp. decided to build a giant warehouse to serve its Southern California stores in 1999, it chose an isolated stretch of the Mojave Desert where the air vibrates with heat in the summer.
The land was cheap. The freeway was nearby. But during summers, the workers are boiling inside the mostly non-air-conditioned warehouse.
They say their leg muscles cramp and their hearts race. They sweat through their clothes. Made sluggish by the heat, they struggle to pull products at the pace the company sets, incurring demerits that threaten their jobs.
In interviews with the Los Angeles Times, Rite Aid workers said at least three employees fell ill with heat exhaustion in June, when an unusually severe heat wave descended on Southern California. Two became so dehydrated that they needed IV bags of saline solution to replenish lost fluids.
Workers say supervisors responded to their complaints with promises to install more fans in the warehouse, which at nearly 1 million square feet is large enough to fit three Walt Disney Concert Halls. But even when they've followed through, it's had little effect as Southland temperatures rise.
Marleni Ortiz is all too familiar with the rapid heart rate and headaches that signal the onset of heat exhaustion. The 27-year-old said she was on the verge of collapsing in the warehouse twice this summer.
At home, Ortiz sometimes sits on her bed before work and contemplates her life. "Do I really need to go?" she asks herself.
"But I have two kids. I need the income. It's really depressing because it's so hot in there," she said.
The conditions inside Rite Aid's Lancaster facility underscore the dangers facing warehouse workers across California, where major retailers are expanding aggressively against a backdrop of increasing temperatures.
Fueled by customers' growing addiction to one-day delivery and a pandemic-driven surge in online shopping, demand for warehouses has skyrocketed. As land near major ports and cities becomes scarcer and pricier, developers are heading deeper into the Inland Empire and the Central Valley, where temperatures are rising faster than in coastal communities. Low-wage workers, most of them Black and Latino, are facing increased risks as they follow the job boom to some of the hottest parts of California, into warehouses that industry experts say are mostly not air-conditioned.
While the White House has recently taken up the issue, state regulations limiting indoor temperatures have been long delayed. The state doesn't require indoor air conditioning.
The Times interviewed more than two dozen warehouse workers, logistics industry experts and advocates for workers' rights, and reviewed documentation of a worker's heat complaint obtained through a public records request. They described how increasing temperatures are jeopardizing warehouse workers' health and safety at a time when demand for workers willing to take these jobs is growing.
Rite Aid workers thought they'd made progress in 2011 when, after years of negotiations, a majority of the warehouse's 500 employees approved a union contract with new rules to prevent heat illness. But a decade later, workers at the huge facility say the protective measures they fought for are insufficient in the face of record heat.
In 2016, the state enacted a law requiring California's Division of Occupational Safety and Health, better known as Cal/OSHA, to set limits on indoor heat. Those limits are still under review. Even if the state eventually enacts an indoor heat standard, it's not clear that Cal/OSHA is capable of enforcing it. The agency's ranks are thin; it has been underfunded for years. An agency spokesman said Rite Aid workers have filed three complaints about indoor heat since 2015. None resulted in a penalty.
Rite Aid spokesman Bradley Ducey said the company has been working with its employees and their union to address the higher temperatures. He said the company has installed more fans, opened doors in the evening to let in cooler air and allowed workers to take rest breaks and access "cooling spots." He said Rite Aid shifts its employees' work hours during the hot summer months to cooler parts of the day -- though employees said this effort has been impeded by demands for mandatory overtime.
"We constantly review and evolve our policies, and seek feedback on indoor temperature management in partnership with Cal OSHA and union representatives," Ducey wrote in an email.
Eight workers said there is only one work area in the warehouse that's air-conditioned -- the chocolate room, where Rite Aid employees inventory and sort bags of Hershey's Kisses and Snickers bars before they're sent to drugstores across the Southland.
Debbie Fontaine, who has worked in the warehouse for 21 years, said it's common for supervisors to walk employees to the chocolate room when they begin to feel faint from the heat.
"We have this giant frickin' refrigerated room to keep the chocolate from melting. While people are practically ... dropping off," Fontaine said.
--
The logistics empire
Stirred by reports of deaths in the Pacific Northwest after a record-breaking heat wave this summer, when temperatures reached a high of 116 degrees in Portland, workers' advocates and politicians have seized on the plight of millions of farmworkers, construction workers and other outdoor laborers. And for good reason -- climate change has already warmed the world by 2 degrees Fahrenheit and is making heat waves more frequent and more intense, exposing outdoor workers to extreme heat with deadly consequences.
Yet the conditions faced by indoor workers in garment factories, steam-filled restaurant kitchens and warehouses have received far less attention. A new study from researchers at UCLA and Stanford suggests that indoor workers in California, like outdoor workers, are more likely to be injured on the job when temperatures climb into the 90s, and that work injuries linked to extreme heat are vastly undercounted in official records.
But climate change hasn't stopped the warehousing and logistics industry from building in inhospitably hot climates.
According to data provided by the research firm CoStar Group, since 2010 more than 400 new warehouses, each over 100,000 square feet, have been built in the Inland Empire, where triple-digit summertime temperatures are normal. Today, about 10% of all warehouses in the United States are located in this part of Southern California, according to Paul Granillo, president of the Inland Empire Economic Partnership, an industry-affiliated group.
New warehouses continue to spring up east of the old ones in high-heat cities such as Beaumont and Banning in Riverside County, and Victorville and Hesperia along the southern edge of the Mojave Desert.
"This trend was already growing," Granillo said, "but the pandemic has just supercharged it."
The Coachella Valley, which matched its all-time high of 123 degrees in June, could be next, he added.
Exactly how many warehouse workers are getting sick and dying from extreme heat is impossible to say. Cal/OSHA does not track this information, and employees are often reluctant to endanger their jobs by reporting injuries or illnesses.
Some warehouse employees have banded together to demand better conditions, winning concessions at a few work sites. They are the exception. Industry experts said that most warehouses continue to rely on large fans and industrial exhaust systems to circulate air. Only managers' offices and employee break rooms are typically air-conditioned.
Fans can help employees stay cool, especially in humid environments that make it difficult for sweat to evaporate. But researchers have found that on blistering days, fans can make conditions worse by blowing hot air on workers' already hot bodies.
The flaws of this approach were clear to Mariana Estrada, a UCLA graduate student who spent the summer of 2017 as a "picker" in one Amazon warehouse, known as ONT6, in Moreno Valley, a city in Riverside County. Estrada said certain parts of the warehouse -- the hallways, human resources office and nurse's office, for example -- were air-conditioned. The company maintains that the entire warehouse was air-conditioned, but Estrada said it was extremely hot where she worked. There were fans at the end of every other aisle. If she was told to fill orders near the fans, it felt like she'd won the lottery, she said. But if not, the heat was brutal and the work physically demanding.
"They were always trying to get you to move faster," Estrada said. Supervisors sometimes chanted, "One step per second," to get workers to pick up their feet. "In terms of heat vulnerability, that just adds another level to the dangers workers experience."
Amazon spokesperson Barbara Agrait said that although it's "not industry standard," the company is proud that all of its California fulfillment centers are air-conditioned. But in addition to these centers, where employees pick, pack and ship items, Amazon operates several other types of warehouses and facilities, some as large as 600,000 square feet, where inventory is sorted and grouped for shipment. When asked, Agrait did not say whether these are also cooled.
The effectiveness of the warehouses' cooling systems is less clear. Several current and former Amazon employees interviewed for this story said the fulfillment centers are cooler than the company's other warehouses, but that parts of the buildings are still very hot. They said employees who load and unload trailers frequently complain about being exposed to extreme temperatures during the summer months.
"The quality of AC seems to depend on which facility you are in and where you're located in the warehouse," said Ellen Reese, a sociology professor at UC Riverside who studies labor conditions at Amazon in the Inland Empire and whose research team has collected interviews with 82 current and former Amazon warehouse employees. While some warehouse workers consider AC one of the perks of working for Amazon, Reese said, others say they are too hot when temperatures climb.
Asked whether its warehouses are air-conditioned, Costco declined to comment. A Walmart spokesperson said the company has made "significant and ongoing improvements to airflow" through the use of fans and other measures, but declined to say whether its warehouses have air conditioning. Similarly, a spokesperson for Target declined to answer questions about whether the company's warehouses are entirely air-conditioned. She said the buildings have air-conditioning units and use a variety of other methods to control indoor temperatures.
A Home Depot spokesperson said the company has different types of temperature-controlled warehouses, depending on the area of the state, the type of work being performed and how open the facility is to the outdoors. She did not answer questions about whether any of them are air-conditioned.
The extreme temperatures warehouse workers face are avoidable, said Tim Shadix, legal director of the Warehouse Worker Resource Center.
"There are food or pharmaceutical warehouses -- they have no problem keeping those climate-controlled," Shadix said. "It's a profit thing, where they're not willing to do that to protect humans."
--
Inside the warehouse
When Jesus Ramos finishes work during the summer, he doesn't race home. After hours inside the warehouse, he's exhausted, his vision is blurry and his clothes are soaked with sweat. He fears he's in no condition to drive.
"I stay in the parking lot a little while, turn on my car with the AC on to try to cool my body down," he said. "That's every day in the summer."
Temperatures inside the Rite Aid warehouse can climb to 90 degrees or higher and simmer there for hours, according to workers and a week's worth of the drugstore company's 2020 temperature records. Photos of temperature readings workers shared with The Times show that on a scorching day last July, it was already 88 degrees inside the warehouse by 5:30 a.m.
Under the union contract, supervisors are required to give workers a five-minute break when temperatures reach 90. They get a 10-minute break when it hits 100 degrees. The union stewards carry their own digital heat monitors to keep managers honest, but they acknowledge the breaks don't offer much relief.
By contrast, military personnel stationed at nearby Edwards Air Force Base are protected by heat regulations that require 40 minutes of rest for every 20 minutes of work when they are performing moderate labor in temperatures over 90 degrees.
Tap water is available for drinking, but some Rite Aid workers interviewed for this story said that what comes out of the warehouse's faucets is "gray," "really dirty" and "doesn't taste like water." One employee said she brings in six bottles of water every day. A Rite Aid spokesman said the company filters its water.
Some workers said they check the weather forecast in the morning and, on occasion, decide to stay home to avoid the heat, forfeiting a day's pay.
When workers complain to supervisors, Ramos said, "their reaction is always, 'We can't do anything about it -- it's upper management.' That's as far as it goes."
Ortiz, the employee who suffered two bouts of heat exhaustion, said she returned to the warehouse after her second episode with a note from her doctor recommending that she be allowed to work in an air-conditioned space for the rest of the summer. She was overheating, her joints ached and her psoriasis was flaring. She said Rite Aid denied her request.
Some of the conditions workers described were difficult to independently verify. Rite Aid refused to allow a reporter and photographer inside its Lancaster warehouse, and a company spokesman declined to answer questions about Ortiz's experience or that of other employees.
Occupational health experts say most heat-related deaths and injuries occur among new hires who aren't used to working in hot weather. But in just the last two years, at least four longtime Rite Aid warehouse employees have fainted or come close to passing out from heat exhaustion, according to employees.
In August of 2020, Martha Ramos, who'd been at Rite Aid for nearly two decades, told the co-worker standing next to her that she wasn't feeling well and then collapsed on the warehouse floor. By the time Ramos' assistant manager found her, Ramos couldn't do much more than nod her head yes or no, according to records of the supervisor's interview with Cal/OSHA. She took Ramos to an air-conditioned break room and held her shaking body while they waited for an ambulance.
Ramos declined to be interviewed for this story, but the documents obtained by The Times through a public records request show that when a warehouse manager reported her fall, he blamed her.
Safety manager Lee Gay wrote in his report that the incident was caused by Ramos' "failure to follow training" and her "failure to hydrate properly." Beneath the question, "Why was the unsafe act committed?" Gay put Xs next to "lack of knowledge or skills" and "improper job attitude." Nowhere on the form did he report that, according to Rite Aid's own records, it was about 87 degrees inside the warehouse when Ramos passed out at 10:15 a.m. -- three degrees below the threshold for rest breaks.
Gay did not respond to requests for comment.
Ramos told a Cal/OSHA investigator that she had consumed three 32-ounce bottles of water that morning. "No matter how much water I drank, it would not cool me down," she said, according to the investigator's notes.
Cal/OSHA closed the investigation after finding that conditions inside the warehouse didn't violate state standards.
--
Regulating heat
The fight to set a limit on indoor heat in California workplaces is nearly 15 years old and still unfinished.
In 2007, Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger vetoed the first bill to pass the state Legislature that would have created an enforceable standard -- a temperature level above which the state considered it unsafe to work. He maintained that California's workplace safety board was already looking into the question.
Schwarzenegger's position aligned with many of California's powerful business interests. Nine more years would pass before the near-death of a warehouse worker in the Inland Empire prompted lawmakers to try again in 2016.
This time they were successful. Gov. Jerry Brown signed the bill into law, requiring Cal/OSHA to begin work on regulations.
The agency's records show that the California Chamber of Commerce argued for a rule that would only apply to non-air-conditioned workplaces where the temperature was 95 degrees or higher. Advocates for workers' rights insisted on a floor of no more than 80 degrees. The agency compromised, issuing a draft rule in 2019 that set a limit of 87 degrees, or lower than 82 degrees if employees were wearing protective clothing or working near heat-generating equipment. Those limits still haven't been finalized.
For now, the agency's inspectors have few tools at their disposal. They can cite an employer for not fixing a broken air conditioner or for having an unsafe work environment. But without clear rules stating the temperature at which heat is hazardous, most businesses face no threat of enforcement action. Cal/OSHA can't even say how many complaints about indoor heat it has received. It doesn't count them.
In September, the Biden administration announced that it would draft the nation's first rules on workplace heat for outdoor and indoor settings and would prioritize workplace inspections on days when the heat index exceeds 80 degrees.
As the state and the federal government consider whether and how to crack down on companies that are exposing workers to extreme heat, warehouse operators and logistics companies are increasingly looking to robots. Across the Inland Empire and the Central Valley, machines are picking, packing, lifting and unloading -- taking on some of their human counterparts' most tedious and labor-intensive jobs.
Companies say this shift helps them survive during labor shortages. But it has the added benefit of introducing robots that don't need bathroom breaks, can't join unions and can tolerate much colder and hotter temperatures than humans.
"I can imagine some companies really hedging their bets and trying to wait out enough automation so that they reduce human exposure to the heat," said Beth Gutelius, research director of the Center for Urban Economic Development at the University of Illinois at Chicago, who studies workplace automation. "It's a pretty dark possibility."
Robots are not expected to displace large numbers of warehouse workers anytime soon, according to a study Gutelius wrote in 2019. As e-commerce companies expand in California, signs advertising open positions are everywhere.
Meanwhile, for the second time in two years, Cal/OSHA inspectors are investigating a complaint of unsafe temperatures in the Rite Aid warehouse.
This time, the union local's president said, the complaint concerns an employee who has suffered heat exhaustion twice in the last two years. She filed a complaint this summer after becoming so weak and disoriented that her doctor urged her to find a new job.
To protect herself at work, she bought a small portable fan that she could wear around her neck. Other Rite Aid workers did the same. Without it, she said, "somebody is going to be waking me up with smelling salts." She ordered it from Amazon.
 Graphic



End of Document


UNITED STATES OF CALIFORNIA; Doubts shroud climate program; Companies claim to fight global warming with carbon 'offset' credits. But the state system lets them keep polluting, undercutting its value.
Los Angeles Times
September 19, 2021 Sunday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN NEWS; Metro Desk; Part A; Pg. 1
Length: 3240 words
Byline: Evan Halper
Body




As fire ripped through the Mendocino County hills the summer of 2018, burning a vast expanse of forest and turning buildings to ash, a curious thing was happening at Eddie Ranch, a sprawling property scorched by the flames.
Its owners were petitioning the state to allow it to be paid millions to preserve trees destroyed by the inferno.
Eddie Ranch said the trees would fight climate change, asserting in its application for California's carbon "offset" program that they would absorb some 280,890 tons of greenhouse gases. Polluters use the program to outsource their obligations to fight global warming: The credits purchased from faraway forests allow them to claim that the greenhouse gases they release at their facilities are not hurting the planet.
The bulk of the Eddie Ranch carbon credits would be bought by PBF Energy, which was looking to erase -- on paper -- emissions from its hulking oil refineries in Torrance and Martinez and the gasoline they sell to the motoring public.
Incinerated trees, of course, can't help the climate. But months after the 2018 fire that burned enough of Eddie Ranch to make nearly all of its planned carbon credits useless in the fight against global warming, the state of California allowed the operation to sell those credits to polluters, basing its decision on the state of the ranch before the fire.
"How do they get away with this stuff?" said Ricardo Pulido, executive director of the nonprofit Community Dreams in Wilmington. The South L.A. clean-air activist is among many exasperated that state climate laws allow oil companies to use the arcane offset system to pollute in communities like his.
PBF said it purchased the credits without checking their origin, and thus was unaware they were linked to Eddie Ranch.
Eddie Ranch was one more puzzling transaction at a time the state's entire multibillion-dollar market of carbon offsets -- most of them generated in distant forests -- is under siege.
To comprehend what went down at Eddie Ranch, said Grayson Badgley, a postdoctoral fellow at Columbia University and Black Rock Forest in New York's Hudson Valley, "imagine a general contractor finalizing the sale of a soon-to-be-completed home while the house under construction is actually in flames."
California is leading the world in confronting climate change. Its push toward renewable electricity is inspiring other states and countries to step up their goals. The state's strict rules on tailpipe emissions and its plans to ban sales of new gas-powered cars and SUVs by 2035 are forcing the auto industry to reckon with its outsize role in global warming.
Yet the opaque carbon trading scheme that is a linchpin of the state's climate efforts -- California is leaning on it to meet as much as half of its greenhouse gas reductions -- is under serious strain at home even as it is getting copied far beyond California.
The U.S. Senate in late June passed a measure that would substantially expand the market for government-certified offset credits, helping farmers sell them to polluters for practices that many scientists worry won't help the climate. Such credits could allow the owner of a refinery or plastics factory or power plant in one part of the country to pollute more if they give a farming operation in another part of the country money to tend to their soil in a certain way or use specific types of manure.
The state of Washington is launching a carbon market modeled after California's, and China is opening its own marketplace. Both allow companies to pollute more if they pay faraway landowners to plant and preserve trees.
Meanwhile, an unregulated cottage industry of firms selling credits to corporations eager to brand as "carbon-neutral" is exploding in the U.S., peddling offset projects that many experts warn quite frequently are not soaking up the greenhouse gases claimed.
The agency charged with enforcing the state's climate rules, the California Air Resources Board, is determined to stay the course, even as its task force on offsets was rocked by the resignation in February of its environmental advocacy and environmental justice representatives, who wrote blistering letters declaring the offset program broken and tainted by self-dealing.
"Most of the members of the Task Force either represent organizations that have a vested interest in expanding the use of offsets or have ties to industries and organizations that stand to benefit financially from offsets," said the resignation letter penned by Brian Nowicki, the state climate policy director at the Center for Biological Diversity.
The officials overseeing the state's climate program aggressively dispute complaints that the offsets are hurting the "fence line" communities in the shadow of the polluting refineries and factories that are using them. Rajinder Sahota, deputy executive officer for climate change and research at the Air Resources Board, said the greenhouse gas emissions from refineries are separate from emissions that contribute to asthma and other health problems.
"The program has worked exactly as we expected," she said. "There is nothing untoward. There are no questions of its legitimacy."
The California regulators are also tangling with a credentialed group of scholars at Stanford, UC Berkeley, UC Santa Barbara, Columbia University and the University of Utah who have concluded the state is significantly exaggerating the environmental value of the offsets California polluters are buying.
"We have documented over $400 million worth of credits issued that we think don't help the climate," said Danny Cullenward, a lecturer at Stanford and policy director of CarbonPlan, the nonprofit research group created by the scientists. Those dubious credits alone would permit companies to release from their facilities in California the amount of greenhouse gas generated by 6.5 million cars over a year on the road.
CarbonPlan published a database of 65 offset projects to illustrate how lenient -- and ineffective -- they believe California's guidelines are. The scientists found the data the state is using to assess properties are flawed and, on average, inflate the greenhouse-gas-absorbing potential of forests in the program by nearly 30%. The state rejects the findings, which have touched off heated debate among forestry experts and preservation groups. The study by CarbonPlan, which Badgley helped lead, is undergoing peer review.
The report is just one of many yellow flags flying around the offset program. There is an even larger question of how many properties in the program were ever in danger of being logged or developed at all. The credits are doing nothing for the climate -- and actually damaging it -- unless they are creating new "carbon sinks" to soak up harmful greenhouse gases.
"This falls into the category of, 'If it looks too good to be true, you need to look more carefully,' " said Charles Canham, a longtime forest ecologist and manager who regrets helping the Great Mountain Forest in Connecticut get approval to sell millions of dollars' worth of the credits to California polluters through the program.
The problem with the deal, Canham said, is that the land was already preserved by a local foundation and being managed in a way that would soak up carbon. "We are paying landowners to keep doing what they were already doing," he said. "People are being unrealistic in claiming this will increase the magnitude of the nation's carbon sink."
Back in Mendocino County, the landowners of the Eddie Ranch offset project -- who include a gubernatorial appointee to the State Board of Forestry and Fire Protection -- received their offsets after the 2018 Ranch fire burned through the project area. PBF can use the credits it purchased from Eddie Ranch to pollute at its Torrance and Martinez refineries.
PBF said it had no idea it was buying credits from Eddie Ranch. "We can confirm we have purchased generic [California Air Resources Board]-certified offsets and credits, and that under CARB's program buyers such as us are unaware of the origins of the credits when purchased," the company said in an email.
That's not exactly how the program works. "Offsets carry with them their project id and reporting period info, so buyers can always know which project generated a credit," said an email from David Clegern, an Air Resources Board spokesman. Many polluters, like PBF, choose not to ask.
Because the burned trees in the Eddie Ranch project wouldn't actually absorb carbon, California had to backfill now-worthless offsets -- by making a large withdrawal from a state carbon credit insurance fund called the "buffer pool." Landowners pay some credits into the fund when they sell offset credits to polluters. When landowners can no longer uphold their end of the offset deal -- because of fire, bankruptcy or other reasons -- the defunct credits get retired and replaced from the insurance fund.
That fund has its own problems. It risks insolvency if wildfires in the West continue at the current pace. Offset projects in some of California's most fire-prone areas are asked to pay into the buffer pool at the same rates as those for far less combustible forests in places like Michigan, according to a November letter in which 16 scientists urged the Air Resources Board to increase how much landowners must contribute. The state so far has opted not to change the rules.
Everything that happened at Eddie Ranch was permitted under the state's rules, including the sale of offsets on land that had already burned. New Forests, the investment firm that represented Eddie Ranch in the deal, said the offsets were granted after the trees burned because they were based on measurements of carbon stocks taken earlier, and a lag at the Air Resources Board held things up.
"The Eddie family's project was developed in careful compliance with all of CARB's regulations and guidance," a statement from New Forests said. "While part of the Eddie family's forest was impacted by fire in 2018, it continues to store hundreds of thousands of tonnes of carbon dioxide and the Eddie family has committed through their forest carbon project to conserve the forest for 100 years."
The now-worthless credits from the Eddie Ranch property were valued at an estimated $3.9 million at the time the family and its partners offloaded them, according to market data.
Officials at the Air Resources Board regard scientists' and activists' warnings about misuse of offsets as old news. The board frequently cites a ruling in its favor by the California Court of Appeal that was unsympathetic to arguments that landowners can too easily take credit for stopping logging or development that was never going to happen.
"The judge said to the plaintiffs, 'You want the Air Resources Board to go out and put a lie detector on every developer and ask them were you ever going to harvest this land?'" Sahota said. "That is not practical."
Confronted with a sustained outpouring of anger from residents who have to live with refinery emissions in toxic-air hot spots such as Wilmington, Carson and Martinez, state lawmakers tightened the rules.
Starting this year, the share of total greenhouse gas emissions California polluters can cancel out with offsets dropped from 8% to 4%, and will bounce back up to 6% after 2025. The new rules also force companies relying heavily on offsets to get as many as half of them from projects the state judges to have direct environmental benefits to California.
The numbers obscure the outsize role offsets are playing in the accounting books of the state's biggest polluters, which can meet most of their obligations to reduce greenhouse gas emissions under the cap-and-trade program using the credits.
The state has certified the sale of enough credits to meet almost all the greenhouse gas reductions required of companies through 2030. The amount is roughly the equivalent of greenhouse gases generated by powering every home in California for two years.
The Air Resources Board has potent and sympathetic allies in its crusade for the status quo. Land trusts, conservation groups and American Indian tribes across the country are heavily invested in a climate action program that has essentially spawned its own economy. Some $2 billion flowed from offset credits over the last eight years, funding educational programs, opioid addiction clinics and cash payments to tribal members, among other things.
Landowners in Alaska alone have reaped roughly $500 million by selling offsets to California polluters, according to an estimate posted by the Alaska Division of Forestry. The Nature Conservancy, one of the nation's biggest beneficiaries of offset revenue, promised to audit its own transactions amid charges that the organization has generated a windfall for itself by promising to save trees in no danger of getting cut.
The audit concluded in June with the organization reporting that its projects followed all the rules for offsets, but acknowledging those rules may be vulnerable to exploitation. It promised to "reassess elements" of some of its projects and create an oversight team to guide future endeavors. The Nature Conservancy declined to specify what projects it is reassessing or if any of them involved credits sold to California polluters.
Clean-air activists in so-called fence-line communities are out of patience. The refineries continuing to pollute their neighborhoods, they say, have spent years avoiding more aggressive and costly mitigation measures by buying offset credits from afar.
"There have been enough years to see that, whatever the refineries are doing through this program, it is not working," said Alicia Rivera, a Wilmington organizer at Communities for a Better Environment, as she stood at the property line of the Phillips 66 refinery.
The offsets are an obscure concept to most Californians, but in this neighborhood where residents report shutting themselves inside their homes to avoid the smell of the refinery and cope with rampant asthma and bronchial infections, the topic is familiar.
"It's not getting better," Dulce Altamirano, who has lived near the refinery for 22 years, said when asked if the state's climate rules have improved things in her community. "It is more terrible."
She wonders if the neighborhood's dismal air quality -- exhaust from the freeways and nearby port create a potent mix when paired with refinery emissions -- caused her children's skin rashes and the breathing troubles that have sent her 11-year-old son, Fredy Herrera, to the hospital multiple times.
"When I would run, my lungs, my lungs ... it felt like someone would grab them," Fredy said inside the family's home, just a few blocks from the Phillips industrial complex. "It would feel like someone squished them."
There is heated debate among scholars and scientists about the extent to which the state's climate laws should be relied on to reduce "co-pollutant" health hazards such as benzyne and nitrogen oxide at refineries. A recent paper from the National Bureau of Economic Research found little evidence that carbon markets are enabling more toxic pollution in fence-line communities.
But the hundreds of millions that oil companies spend on offsets isn't reducing pollution in local communities, and the extent to which they are helping the climate is in dispute.
Phillips bought an estimated $32 million worth of credits from a forest in the Copper River Basin of Alaska to offset roughly the amount of greenhouse gases that would be created by driving more than 543,000 cars for a year. The credits came from the nation's biggest offset project, managed by the Ahtna tribe, which is using the revenue for job training and other social programs.
But when the researchers at CarbonPlan examined the project, they were bewildered by how California could confidently declare the forest is preserving so much carbon. Although the state's rules are supposed to use federal forestry data to describe the type and density of local tree species, no such data exist for that region in Alaska.
At Chevron, which owns large refineries in the Bay Area city of Richmond and the Southern California city of El Segundo, a large volume of greenhouse gas pollution the company is creating in the state is being allowed because it purchased tens of millions of dollars of offsets from the Passamaquoddy tribe in the woods of Maine. In publicly announcing sales of the credits, tribal leaders stressed that the deals allow them to continue doing what they were already doing on the land.
The funds have been a boon for the tribe, which is using the money to invest in its blueberry harvesting and maple syrup production businesses, as well as open a clinic to help tribal members struggling with opioid addiction. But the reality that these offsets would be used by refineries to release emissions in marginalized communities in California weighed on the tribe as it considered whether to go this route.
"We had a two-year debate in the community around this project and whether from a philosophical perspective the tribe ought to be engaging in this program," said Michael-Corey Hinton, an attorney for the tribe. But Hinton said the tribe saw in the offsets an opportunity to secure a sustainable future and help the environment.
"It was the right move for a socially disadvantaged community suffering our own environmental injustice on a daily basis," he said. "It is a little bit of an indirect attack to say we are contributors to pollution at a Chevron plant in California. We are not. We have been victims of environmental abuse from all sides, and we are fashioning a way to survive and ensure our existence in this world."
It is a persuasive argument. Also persuasive is the case the Nature Conservancy makes for selling California polluters millions of dollars' worth of carbon credits from the St. John River Forest in Maine -- enabling the nonprofit to pursue more preservation projects around the world.
But do those California polluters deserve credit for protecting a carbon sink that will absorb 1.2 million tons of greenhouse gases? The Nature Conservancy purchased the 30-mile-long Maine property for $35 million more than two decades ago, as part of a St. John campaign that raised $57 million, suggesting there was substantial cash for the group to preserve the land.
Officials at the conservancy said the California offset revenue allowed it to improve the management practices on the property and reduce timber harvesting, which would not have been possible otherwise, generating significant climate benefits.
"One of the insidious aspects of the program is it hooks conservation and Indigenous groups on a source of funds," said Neil Tangri, who in February resigned in protest from his post as the environmental justice representative on the state's offset task force. "So you have a constituency that will fight for this program whether or not it is doing anything meaningful in a larger sense.
"They may be using the money for good things," Tangri said. "But in the end, it is a Ponzi scheme."
--
()
UNITED STATES OF CALIFORNIA
No state has had a bigger impact on the direction of the United States than California, a prolific incubator and exporter of outside-the-box policies and ideas. This occasional series examines what that has meant for the state and the country, and how far Washington is willing to go to spread California's agenda as the state's own struggles threaten its standing as the nation's think tank.
 Graphic



End of Document


Fan of national parks? Get ready for them to heat up; Climate change will make it less pleasant to visit public lands in summer, a study finds.
Los Angeles Times
September 26, 2021 Sunday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: CALIFORNIA; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 1
Length: 1127 words
Byline: Sammy Roth
Body




Glaciers vanishing in Glacier National Park. Sand dunes blowing away at White Sands in New Mexico. Wildfire smoke obscuring the Tetons, flames licking at the sequoias near their namesake park and Joshua trees dying out in theirs.
These are just some of the ways that global heating is reshaping America's public lands.
If you care about endangered species, it's not great. If you think we should preserve ecosystems that support human health, it's no better. And if you enjoy hiking in wildlands during the summer, you might want to prepare yourself.
A new study from Utah State University's Institute of Outdoor Recreation and Tourism, published this month, tries to quantify how our enjoyment of public lands will shift as temperatures rise.
The researchers estimate that outdoor recreation in the summer could drop 18% by 2050, with public lands visitation rising by 12% in the winter. The summer drop-off could be greatest in the already hot and muggy South Atlantic-Gulf region, with California and other Western states seeing substantial declines, too.
"I think climate change is going to impact pretty much everything we do in our daily lives moving forward," said lead author Emily Wilkins, who conducted the research as a postdoc at Utah State.
The study is significant for several reasons.
First off, Wilkins and her colleagues came up with a fascinating method for measuring public lands visitation, and used those measurements to make projections going forward. The National Park Service is the only federal lands agency that collects visitor data by month or season, so the researchers turned to social media. They downloaded millions of geotagged photos from the image-hosting website Flickr, spanning 2006-2019 and taken on public lands managed by dozens of federal and state agencies.
Then they calculated average season-by-season maximum temperatures for the areas where those photos were taken; ran models to estimate how heat affected visitation within different parts of the country (accounting for various other factors); and finally used existing projections of rising temperatures to estimate how visitation patterns will change as the climate crisis worsens.
Why use Flickr for geotagged photos, rather than far more popular Instagram?
It turns out Flickr, unlike Instagram, makes its data available to the public for free. And although Flickr may not be the cat's meow in 2021, Wilkins says it was plenty popular for much of the last 15 years, giving her and her colleagues sufficient data.
And what about all the second-order climate consequences that might affect how and when people visit public lands, beyond just extreme heat -- stuff like wildfire smoke, evaporating reservoirs and worsening storms?
Wilkins agreed that researchers have many more questions to address. She pointed to hunting and fishing as popular pastimes that could be disrupted as animals seek out new habitats better suited to their needs and as earlier-melting mountain snow changes the timing of peak fishing season. The timing of popular wildflower blooms could also change.
"It's easier to study temperature and precipitation and big broad climate patterns across the U.S. But it's harder to understand how indirect factors like changing species distribution are going to impact where people go, how they experience the outdoors," Wilkins said. "There's a big question of how these little, more indirect effects of climate change are going to add up."
The study identified the Upper Colorado River Basin as the only region projected to see fewer winter visitors as the planet warms, which Wilkins said is likely because skiing in the Rocky Mountains is a main draw.
For hikers or trail runners who don't depend on snow or the presence of certain animals to have a good time, rising temperatures "will impact them a little bit less," Wilkins said. "You don't have to plan around when the fish are going to be in the stream."
That may be comforting for people who mainly enjoy public lands through hiking. But for the government officials charged with managing those lands, there's a lot more to worry about -- and that's where the new research could offer guidance.
If visitation falls in summer but grows in winter (and potentially spring as well), agencies such as the National Park Service and the Bureau of Land Management may need to keep visitors centers, bathrooms and campgrounds open throughout the year, rather than just seasonally, or even hire more staffers in the winter. That will almost certainly require additional funding.
Gateway towns just outside national parks and monuments -- such as Moab, Utah, or Estes Park, Colo. -- may also have to adjust. Restaurants, gear merchants and other businesses catering to tourists might need to stay open more of the year.
Still, even if fewer people camp in Great Basin National Park or Bears Ears National Monument over the summer than might have otherwise, that doesn't mean summer visitor counts will necessarily drop. National parks and other public lands are more popular than ever. Wilkins wouldn't be surprised if overall summer visitation continues to rise.
And that's where there might be a silver lining in the new study. The most popular parks are already dealing with severe overcrowding, a problem that is typically worse during summer season. Packed crowds can diminish the experience of quiet and solitude that many people seek out in nature and make life unpleasant even in the most tourism-friendly gateway towns.
Shifting some of those crowds to winter and spring could be a breath of fresh air for park managers and nearby residents.
"Certain places might want more visitation, and certain places might be overcrowded and not want more visitation," Wilkins said.
What about Death Valley National Park, already one of the hottest places on Earth? Not many people brave the intense summer heat to begin with, and last year's 130-degree temperatures sent tourists scrambling to take photos with the giant thermometer at Furnace Creek. Maybe additional heat records would be a boon for the park?
Wilkins didn't have much to say about that. She did, however, suggest public lands managers will need to do more to keep summer visitors informed about dealing with extreme heat: how much water to carry, how to stay safe. Just last month, two hikers died at Death Valley within a few days of each other.
And lest we forget, the future isn't set in stone. Some amount of climate change is already baked in, but the more humanity can reduce emissions, the less global temperatures will rise. Ultimately, the fate of our public lands is in our hands.
--
This article was originally published in Boiling Point, a weekly email newsletter about climate change and the environment. Go to latimes.com/boilingpoint to sign up.
 Graphic



End of Document


California sees its hottest summer ever -- so far; Climate change is causing heat records in the Golden State and across the West to be 'broken in quick succession,' expert says
Los Angeles Times
September 10, 2021 Friday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN NEWS; Metro Desk; Part A; Pg. 1
Length: 1257 words
Byline: Hayley Smith
Body




California and several other western states this year endured the hottest summer on record, according to federal data released Thursday, underscoring the ways rapid climate change is unleashing unprecedented wildfires, deadly heat waves and drought conditions.
In addition to California, officials said Idaho, Nevada, Oregon and Utah also set all-time heat records for the meteorological summer, spanning June through August. Sixteen other states also saw a top-five warmest summer on record, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which issued its findings Thursday.
Nationwide, the stretch from June to August tied with the 1936 Dust Bowl summer as the hottest on record, with temperatures across the country averaging 2.6 degrees above average.
Rising temperatures have been a common denominator in a summer of ecological crises across the West.
A heat wave that blanketed the Pacific Northwest in June claimed the lives of hundreds, including immigrant farmworkers and the elderly. An estimated 1 billion sea creatures died because of heat off the coast, and the Sacramento River is facing a "near-complete loss" of young Chinook salmon because of abnormally warm waters.
The searing heat dried the state's landscape and helped pave the way for more than 2 million acres to burn, with officials fearing the worst is yet to come. The blazes sent scores of residents fleeing from their homes and choked countless others with lung-burning smoke.
Just this week, Lancaster saw its 58th day of the year with temperatures above 100 degrees -- breaking a record from 2003. Fresno broke its record with 64 triple-digit days. On Wednesday, record temperatures for Sept. 8 were registered in Palmdale, Sandberg and Paso Robles, where highs reached 106, 95 and 106 degrees, respectively, the National Weather Service said.
"All these records are being broken, and broken in quick succession," said Karen McKinnon, an assistant professor at the UCLA Institute of the Environment and Sustainability, "and that's basically indicative of this trend that is largely due to climate change."
The grim conditions of the Dust Bowl years were more of an outlier, McKinnon said, while the latest extremes belong to a larger warming trend. In fact, she said, the summer of 2021 was even hotter than mere extrapolation would suggest, leading some to question whether that warming is accelerating.
Alan Barreca, an environmental economist at UCLA, said the record summer months were not surprising given the "fairly steady increase in temperatures in California and throughout the world" -- but they are concerning.
Extreme heat is among the deadliest of natural disasters, he said, and soaring temperatures often disproportionately affect the most vulnerable, including pregnant women, infants, elderly people, homeless people and residents of low-income neighborhoods.
Extreme heat is also worrisome because it expands the necessity for and reliance on air conditioning -- which not only furthers inequality but also feeds into the climate-change system that is driving temperatures up.
"Air conditioners seem to be an absolute necessity going into the end of the 21st century," Barreca said. "We're going to need them, and we're going to also need to be cutting back on our emissions."
Conditions have already become so dire that the California Independent System Operator, which runs most of the state's power grid, on Tuesday asked the federal government to declare an "electric reliability emergency" that would allow six natural gas-fired power plants -- including facilities in Huntington Beach and Long Beach -- to generate power at maximum levels, even if they violate air pollution limits.
It's a scrambling effort by state officials to reduce the risk of rolling blackouts in the face of increased energy demands by adding new electricity supplies, including fossil-fuel resources that contribute to climate change and worsening heat waves -- a short-term sacrifice that has proved controversial among clean energy groups.
The grid operator was granted a similar request during a heat wave last September, but only for a week. This time, the agency is asking for 60 days -- a sign that it expects extreme heat could continue well into the fall. The ISO has already issued two flex alerts this week, which call on residents to conserve energy from 4 to 9 p.m., when net demand is typically at its peak.
But even as the energy grid groans, heat advisories and storm-system warnings are promising to bring more dangers to residents in the form of increased fire weather. More than a dozen active wildfires are burning across California, and officials fear that added heat, dryness and the potential for dry lightning could make conflagrations worse or even ignite new ones.
The National Weather Service is forecasting very hot and dry conditions in Southern California through Friday, with temperatures in some areas expected to be 5 to 15 degrees warmer than normal. The Antelope Valley area could see daytime temperatures as high as 108 degrees, while Los Angeles will climb into the 90s Friday and Saturday.
A heat advisory also has been issued across the Inland Empire, the Santa Ana Mountains and portions of San Bernardino and Riverside counties through Friday. Residents are advised to seek shade, stay hydrated and avoid any activity that could spark a fire.
In several areas across the state, the possibility of thunderstorms could bring erratic winds, flash flooding and the "potential for lightning-caused wildfires," officials said.
"It's all a concern," said David Sweet, a meteorologist with the weather service in Oxnard. "If a lightning strike starts a fire, then the gusty winds could push it quickly. And aside from thunderstorm activities, it's going to be pretty warm and dry. ... So with the heat, with any gusty winds -- elevated fire danger."
But the maximum threat remains in Northern California, where beleaguered fire crews are still battling the 927,000-acre, multicounty Dixie fire and the 217,000-acre Caldor fire burning near South Lake Tahoe.
"We're right smack in the middle of wildfire peak season," Chief Thom Porter of the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection said this week. "Everybody needs to remain vigilant."
The National Weather Service said much of the fire zone, including Plumas and Lassen counties and the South Lake Tahoe area, will be hit with gusty winds and the chance of thunderstorms Friday, although a cooling trend should bring temperatures down in the days to come.
Dry lightning strikes -- which last year spurred a rash of wildfires in the fall -- are a possibility. A fire weather watch has been issued across much of Northern California through 11 p.m. Friday.
While the fires have forced thousands to flee their homes, they have driven many others to stay indoors with their windows shut against the toxic smoke. Barreca, of UCLA, said that could be a deadly pattern for people without air conditioning during a heat wave.
And McKinnon noted that the extreme weather behaviors plaguing the state -- including fire, heat and drought -- are all connected. The stagnant high-pressure system that created many of the summer's "heat domes" are also associated with low precipitation and heating of the state's surface.
"The warming of temperatures overall can lead to drying, and that drying later in the season can lead to warming, and all of those things can lead to enhanced wildfire," she said. "Basically, it's all linked."
--
Times staff writer Sammy Roth contributed to this report.
 Graphic



End of Document


Tahoe not as deep -- or clear; Lake is low enough to stop feeding Truckee River, and docks are far from water line.
Los Angeles Times
October 18, 2021 Monday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN NEWS; Metro Desk; Part A; Pg. 1
Length: 727 words
Byline: Alex Wigglesworth
Body




Lake Tahoe's water level has dropped so low that water is no longer flowing into the Truckee River and salmon aren't expected to spawn in a major tributary this year.
Some boat ramps and docks are hundreds of feet from the water line, and clumps of stringy algae have been washing up on beaches, said Geoffrey Schladow, director of the UC Davis Tahoe Environmental Research Center.
"It's putting us on warning that things could get a lot worse," he said.
The receding water level, which is driven by climate change and drought, comes as the latest insult to the treasured tourist destination nestled in the Sierra Nevada. Its waters have already been clouded by smoke and ash from multiple wildfires this summer.
Lake Tahoe's water level is always fluctuating. It is typically lowest in December and January and then increases in the spring as melting snow from mountains flows down, Schladow said.
"This year, we didn't get that bump," he said. "It was more or less dropping since the previous year."
Multiple boat ramps were unable to open for the summer season. And with no game-changing precipitation, conditions have continued to worsen. The water level is usually somewhere between the lake's natural rim, which sits at 6,223 feet, and a dam at the top of the Truckee River that is six feet higher, Schladow said. But last week, it dropped just below the rim. By Saturday afternoon, the water level was roughly half an inch below the rim -- and falling, according to data from the U.S. Geological Survey.
That's because the lake each year loses about six feet of water from evaporation -- a rate of about a quarter-inch a day, which can increase with high winds, Schladow said.
"If this next year is just an average year, or worse, a dry year, it probably means that the water level this time next year will be maybe something like four feet below the rim," he said. "And if the next year is dry, it sort of continues."
The water last dropped below Lake Tahoe's rim toward the end of the 2012-17 drought, which was followed by the region's wettest year on record, Schladow said. These swings from dry to wet are nothing new.
"What is changing is that these periods of extreme low and extreme high water seem to be happening more and more frequently," he said.
That comes as climate change is causing droughts to become drier, hotter and longer, and bursts of precipitation to become shorter and more intense, he said.
"One of the manifestations of climate change that all the models seem to agree on is that there will be more extremes," he said. "Hot and cold, wet and dry."
Low water levels in a major tributary to Lake Tahoe forced the U.S. Forest Service to cancel an annual festival celebrating the fall migration of the kokanee salmon. The salmon are not expected to spawn in Taylor Creek this year because of the ongoing drought, although they could return in future years if conditions allow, the Forest Service said.
It's possible that as the water level continues to drop, the streams that flow into Lake Tahoe could become blocked by sandbars, further jeopardizing the ability of salmon to navigate them, Schladow said. Although they will spawn elsewhere, they will probably have low success, he added.
So-called terminal bodies of water that permanently lose their outflows and become cut off from tributaries are known to grow salty and inhospitable to aquatic life, although that is not expected to happen with Tahoe anytime soon.
Several inches of snow fell in Lake Tahoe last week, but it wasn't enough to make a measurable difference in the water level.
The National Weather Service said more is on the way into Monday, with 3 to 6 inches expected to fall above 7,000 feet. Another storm is expected next weekend, said Amanda Young, meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Reno.
But overall, she said, this year has been drier and warmer than normal in the forecast area. And long-term forecasts are calling for those conditions to persist, Schladow said -- although that could change, he added.
If the area does see significant precipitation, especially rain, that will raise another concern: debris flows in recent burn areas including the watershed at the south end of the lake, which was scorched by the Caldor fire this year.
"Next spring there may be a lot of material being washed in from Trout Creek and the Upper Truckee River," Schladow said.
 Graphic



End of Document


Council addresses dangers of high heat; L.A. proposal directs departments to track deaths and identify vulnerable groups.
Los Angeles Times
October 14, 2021 Thursday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: CALIFORNIA; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 1
Length: 751 words
Byline: Tony Barboza
Body




Members of the Los Angeles City Council are urging new measures to protect residents from extreme heat, citing a recent Los Angeles Times investigation that revealed the state has failed to adequately address the health dangers of worsening heat waves or accurately count heat-related deaths.
City Councilman Paul Koretz introduced a motion this week directing the city's Emergency Management Department, among other actions, to report back on the status and cost of a surveillance system to track "when and where heat- related deaths are occurring, the identification of vulnerable populations in those locations, and the development of plans to minimize to near-zero deaths related to heat."
Koretz said in an interview that his motion was inspired by The Times' reporting and made him realize that "people are dying from the heat, and we're really not focused on it." The reason, at least in part, is due to a lack of information on where to focus government resources to reduce the death toll. "We really now can see what's coming, and we'd be idiots not to act to prevent it," he said.
Extreme heat is one of the deadliest consequences of global warming. But in a state that prides itself as a climate leader, California chronically undercounts the death toll and has failed to address the growing threat of heat-related illness and death, the Times investigation found.
"We're hitting high enough temperatures that it's clear without focusing and without concrete implementation steps, which we're going to be looking for, we'll have more and more people dying from the heat," Koretz said, "and we just can't allow that as a city."
The motion cites the Times investigation published last week. It found that California leaders have failed to address the growing threat of heat illness and death and undercounted the number of heat-related fatalities between 2010 and 2019. A Times analysis found that the true toll was probably six times higher than the state's count.
Experts interviewed by The Times said an effective heat response would include a surveillance system to track when and where heat-related deaths and injuries were occurring, but the California Department of Public Health doesn't collect that kind of real-time data and cannot say how many people died in recent heat waves.
"These deaths and illnesses must not remain invisible," read Koretz's motion, seconded by councilmembers Mitch O'Farrell and Monica Rodriguez.
Some local governments in California, including L.A. County, already have surveillance systems in place to track heat-related illness. L.A. County's Department of Public Health monitors a "geographically representative sample of 50% of hospitals" from which it receives data within days or weeks.
But there is no statewide system to track heat-related deaths and emergency-room visits in real time. The state health department does not collect real-time data on heat illnesses from hospitals and does not require counties to track and report it, The Times reported last week.
Koretz's motion also asks city of Los Angeles staff from different departments for recommendations to improve the city's heat preparedness -- including the use of early warning systems -- and to report back with a plan to access any state and federal funding that is available to help the city prepare for worsening heat waves.
It also directs the city attorney's office to report back on a potential ordinance that would hold employers accountable for protecting their workers from extreme heat by instituting a mandatory charge of criminal negligence "for any employee deaths associated with business operations that occur due to preventable heat-related deaths."
Koretz said changes in laws and communication with employers are needed "so that those who don't care will be compelled to care, and those that do care but don't really know what the steps are that they should be taking, that we can help provide that guidance."
"If people are dying at work, if they're dying because they don't have air conditioning and they're senior citizens, if they're dying because they have Alzheimer's and they walk outside and then get lost ... all these things could be preventable," Koretz said.
The motion was assigned to the Energy, Climate Change, Environmental Justice, and River Committee, and the City Council could vote on it as early as November. Koretz's motion would require city staff to report back 30 days after City Council approval.
--
Times staff writer Anna M. Phillips contributed to this story.
Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: DEATH & DYING (92%); CITY GOVERNMENT (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); CITIES (90%); DEATH RATES (90%); EXTREME TEMPERATURES (90%); HEAT STRESS DISORDERS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (89%); HEAT WAVES (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); PUBLIC HEALTH (89%); PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (89%); PUBLIC HEALTH SURVEILLANCE (89%); SURVEILLANCE (89%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY (89%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (86%); COUNTY GOVERNMENT (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); STATISTICAL METHOD (78%); STATISTICS (78%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (78%); GLOBAL WARMING (66%); LOS ANGELES CITY COUNCIL (%); HOT WEATHER (%); HEALTH (%); HEALTH STATISTICS (%); HEAT (%)
 Company:  LOS ANGELES TIMES (58%)
 Industry: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (58%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (58%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (89%); GLOBAL WARMING (66%)
 Person: ABBY FINKENAUER (50%)
 Geographic: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (93%); CALIFORNIA, USA (94%)
 Load-Date: October 14, 2021

 

End of Document
Fires reaching higher elevations; Climate warming is fueling extreme behavior, experts say
Los Angeles Times
September 14, 2021 Tuesday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN NEWS; Metro Desk; Part A; Pg. 1
Length: 1147 words
Byline: Hayley Smith
Dateline:  SOUTH LAKE TAHOE, CALIF.  
Body




Just hours before the Caldor fire threatened to level the resort town of South Lake Tahoe, the massive blaze performed a staggering feat: burning from one side of the Sierra to the other.
It seared through crests and valleys, over foothills and ridges -- and also at elevations of 8,000 feet or higher.
Ash and smoke rained down on the Tahoe basin and sent thousands fleeing from its soot-darkened shores as the fire skirted a towering granite ridge many believed would be a buffer from the flames. But the fire kept climbing higher, spewing wind-whipped embers that landed, in some cases, more than a mile away.
Experts said the fire's extreme behavior is part of a worrisome trend driven by the state's warming climate, in which rapid snowmelt and critical dryness are propelling wildfires to ever-higher elevations, scorching terrain that previously was too wet to burn and threatening countless residents.
"What we're seeing is that these fuels at high elevations that typically weren't able to carry a fire, now are able to carry fire," said John Abatzoglou, an associate professor of climatology at UC Merced and coauthor of a recent study about wildfires at higher elevations. "That's allowing these fires to effectively reach new heights."
The study, published in June in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, found that climate warming over the last few decades has exposed an additional 31,400 square miles of U.S. forests to fires at higher elevations.
It also found that between 1984 and 2017, fires in the Sierra Nevada advanced in elevation by more than 1,400 feet, surpassing some previously dependable moisture barriers.
Of the 15 ecological regions researchers studied, the Sierra Nevada was among three that saw the greatest upslope advances, along with the southern and middle Rockies.
"We do see in the Sierra Nevada that fires have increased in terms of their burned area over the past 40 years," Abatzoglou said. "What's novel here is that we're documenting an additional shift in the elevational bands where those fires are occurring."
Before the year 2000, it was rare for a forest in the Sierra Nevada to burn above 8,200 feet, Abatzoglou said. In the years since, there has been an eightfold increase in forested burned areas at that elevation. Both the Caldor fire and the Dixie fire -- the state's second-largest wildfire on record -- passed that elevation threshold.
One of the most extreme examples, the 2020 Cameron Peak fire in Colorado, blazed at above 12,000 feet elevation and jumped the Continental Divide.
That extreme behavior may partially explain why the Caldor fire jumped the granite ridge overlooking the Tahoe basin, Abatzoglou said.
It also helps explain how the Caldor and Dixie fires became the first two to burn clear through the Sierra.
"Two times in our history, and they're both happening this month," California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection Chief Thom Porter said. "We need to be really cognizant that there is fire activity happening in California that we have never seen before."
Mark Schwartz, a professor emeritus at UC Davis, said the Dixie fire expanded rapidly as it crested and came down the east side of the Sierra. It also burned into Lassen Volcanic National Park, where it scaled some elevations of 8,500 feet or higher.
Some peaks and ridges near South Lake Tahoe are well over 8,000 feet and sparsely populated with fir trees. But dried vegetation is primed for ignition, enabling some fires to climb higher and send more embers aloft.
"This is dangerous," Schwartz said, "because controlling wildfire has often relied on containment at lower elevations, letting fires run out of fuels and fire weather at higher elevations."
There are several factors that could be contributing to this shift, but researchers said the primary cause is the warming trend that is exacerbating the drought and drying out vegetation across the state. The vast majority of high-elevation fires in California are being ignited by lightning -- which is more apt to start a fire when it strikes arid vegetation.
"There's a good relationship between how warm and dry the vegetation is across the broader Sierra, and just how high those fires can carry up into these montane systems," Abatzoglou said.
Higher elevations generally have snowpacks that last into June. When those melt, they bring an additional burst of water that keeps the vegetation wet. But with warmer temperatures and an ongoing drought, much of that moisture has disappeared.
On April 1, the date when California's snowpack is typically at its maximum, the California Department of Water Resources recorded only 59% of its average depth. Rain in the Northern and Central Sierra was even lower, at 50% of average, which tied 2021 for the third-driest water year on record.
Mojtaba Sadegh, an assistant professor of civil engineering at Boise State University and another of the fire study's authors, said the region's snowpack is entering into a dangerous cycle with higher-elevation fires.
"These high-elevation mountains are water towers for us," Sadegh said. "Most of our water in the West is coming from that snowpack."
When a fire burns high-elevation trees, it removes some of the canopy shading the snowpack and opens it to more melting sunlight, he said. That process also changes the reflectance of the surface, exposing more dark ground and evaporating more water.
It's a cycle that can change the quantity and quality of water delivered to the state's reservoirs, he said.
And while warming is the primary driver of the change, both the 2015 and 2021 studies noted that a century of fire suppression in California has allowed an accumulation of vegetation to build up in forests, particularly in lower and middle elevations. When fire does arrive, it has more fuel to carry flames up and potentially over the tops of ridges and mountains.
It's something firefighters have observed as they battle the state's increasingly unpredictable blazes, said Robert Foxworthy, a Cal Fire spokesman. Foxworthy said there's been a "huge deficit" in the snowpack this year, along with massively desiccated vegetation.
The dried-out fuel conditions "are leading to these longer-duration fires, and burning at the higher elevations that we haven't seen years in the past," he said.
Although not every fire will soar to such altitudes, exceedingly high fires often are challenging to fight. Many high-elevation fires are in remote areas, and some small towns in those areas offer little infrastructure and few roads for access or evacuation. Firefighters are having to hike farther and higher, often with only the supplies they can carry.
And it's not only firefighters who are affected by the shift toward more higher-elevation fires. The blazes are also dangerous for the people who live below them; the fires can remove trees that help anchor against avalanches, researchers said.
 Graphic



End of Document


BUSINESS; Climate woes may show in your cup of joe; Rising coffee prices, and food costs in general, are partly due to global warming.
Los Angeles Times
September 14, 2021 Tuesday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN NEWS; Business Desk; Part A; Pg. 1
Length: 1077 words
Byline: DAVID LAZARUS
Body




Climate change is such a massive problem, with such potentially catastrophic ramifications, many people have trouble getting their heads around the danger we face.
So let's put things in simpler terms.
Climate change means you'll be paying more for coffee, every day, for possibly the rest of your life.
And it may not taste as good.
"U.S. consumers should expect much more expensive and lower-quality coffee because of rising temperatures, extreme rainfalls, and higher frequency of severe droughts," said Titus O. Awokuse, chairman of the department of agricultural, food and resource economics at Michigan State University.
"Recent studies show that up to 60% of high-quality coffee species are at risk of extinction because of the negative impacts of climate change," he told me.
There. Got your attention now?
Climate change isn't just an environmental issue. It's a consumer issue.
The cost of food is rising. That's partly due to supply and labor issues related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
But it's also a reflection of how our planet's changing climate is affecting crops, livestock and other food sources.
"Prices reflect supply and demand, and if production costs rise or supply becomes more constrained, prices will rise," said Carolyn Dimitri, an associate professor of nutrition and food studies at New York University.
"Climate change is likely to increase production costs and reduce supply, at least in some years," she predicted, adding that she would be "horrified" if decent coffee became harder to come by.
"I will pay just about any price for my coffee," Dimitri said, echoing my own thoughts and, I suspect, those of millions of other coffee drinkers.
Coffee futures recently jumped to the highest level in four years, due in part to extreme weather in Brazil, the world's largest coffee producer.
Factor in pandemic-related supply issues, and the cost of coffee beans has risen more than 40% so far this year.
Because caffeine heavyweights such as Starbucks and Nestle buy their coffee supplies well in advance, not all dealers of our daily fix will be raising prices immediately.
But some are already warning of higher retail costs.
J.M. Smucker, maker of Folgers and Dunkin' ground coffee, said it has no choice but to jack up prices. "We are seeing inflationary costs impacting the entire fiscal year," the company's chief financial officer said during a recent conference call.
Coffee is just one item on supermarket shelves that's getting more expensive because of climate change.
Harsh weather is driving up the cost of sugar. Wheat prices are now at the highest level in nearly eight years.
Corn, soybeans, avocados, almonds, honey, citrus -- all are more expensive.
And this isn't just in America. According to the United Nations, food prices worldwide were up by 33% in August from a year before.
"Climate change is a contributor because climate variability, extreme events and sustained droughts in certain regions can reduce yields and hence supplies," said Sanford Eigenbrode, a professor of entomology at the University of Idaho.
This isn't to say we're doomed. Some experts believe global food production will adjust to a changing climate.
"Climate change will not affect agriculture the same way in all parts of the world," said Ellen Bruno, an agricultural economist at UC Berkeley. "We have a lot of adaptive capacity."
In other words, crops that start failing in some parts of the world may thrive in others.
Overall, however, climate change is reaching -- or has already reached, by some estimates -- a point of no return. And this all but guarantees higher food costs in the future.
A recent report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the world's leading authority on climate science, found that droughts that previously occurred perhaps once a decade are now 70% more frequent than in the preindustrial era.
Climate change obviously poses a greater threat than just pricier meals. It means hotter temperatures, heavier rainfall, more droughts, rising sea levels, flooding of coastal areas and other dystopian prospects.
Solutions for a problem of this scope aren't easy. Nations around the world are being called upon to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and adopt more eco-friendly energy sources.
These measures are challenging and expensive, and require both unity and sacrifice -- two things that aren't always easy in a world guided mostly by self-interest and short-sightedness.
What you can do -- what you should do -- is support politicians who recognize the danger and who are prepared to rise above selfish interests and show necessary leadership during a time of global crisis.
Also consider taking your business to companies that are willing to play a role in addressing climate change, although it's not always clear how serious some corporations are in this regard.
Institutional Shareholder Services has found that just over a third of Standard & Poor's 500 companies have set ambitious climate change targets. The rest have modest goals or no climate change plans at all.
Some tech and retail heavyweights, including Microsoft and Walmart, have been among the most aggressive in laying out plans to become "carbon neutral" in coming years.
But others, especially those in the heavily polluting energy sector, have been cagier about their intentions or have resisted overhauling operations for the sake of planetary survival.
As I said up top, this is tough stuff, requiring tough, sweeping solutions -- the sort of behavior that human beings historically have not shown themselves to be very good at.
So keep the focus tight. If nothing else, think about the food you eat. Think about your daily coffee habit. Hell, think about my daily coffee habit.
"People in the U.S. have enjoyed a long period where crop yields have increased and food prices have declined," said Dane Scott, a professor of environmental ethics at the University of Montana. "That period is likely over."
He told me price hikes are now "inevitable."
"Consumers should expect to pay more for food products to help finance the enormous undertaking of adapting agriculture to a changing climate," Scott said. "The greater the disruption to the Earth's climate system, the greater the social and economic costs of adaptation."
And your grande, quad, nonfat, one-pump, no-whip mocha is no exception.
--
David Lazarus' column runs Tuesdays and Fridays. He also can be seen daily on KTLA-TV Channel 5 and on Twitter @davidlaz. Send your tips to david.lazarus@latimes.com
 Graphic



End of Document


EXTREME HEAT; Hot, humid and deadly; High temperatures, combined with muggy air from Baja, can wreak havoc -- and California isn't ready
Los Angeles Times
October 11, 2021 Monday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: CALIFORNIA; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 1
Length: 1359 words
Byline: Tony Barboza, Anna M. Phillips, Paul Duginski
Body




When a major heat wave hits Southern California, it begins with a jab: A ridge of high pressure builds over Nevada or Mexico and sweeps into the region, bringing scorching temperatures along with it. Then comes the right hook: A mass of humid air created by unusually warm water just off the northern coast of Baja California moves in from the southeast.
Combined, they deliver a deadly blow, wreaking havoc on heavily populated regions such as Los Angeles County.
"We understand pretty well how and why they form," said Glynn Hulley, a climate scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory who since 2000 has documented a shift toward hotter, more humid heat waves in urban areas of Southern California. "It's almost like the heat waves have changed their personality, shifting to warmer and more humid nighttime events."
Climate change is transforming the character of the West's hottest periods -- making them more frequent, more persistent, more humid and more lethal. Experts say this shift should prompt changes in emergency notifications and public health response to keep the death toll from rising. But that isn't happening.
In California and other states, key strategies that could protect the most vulnerable people and save lives, including urban cooling measures and better warning systems, remain a low priority compared with fighting other environmental hazards, such as wildfires. Environmentalists and health advocates see this as a major shortcoming in the state's efforts to adapt to the warming climate.
"Whatever we're doing isn't working, and it's only getting worse," said Kathy Baughman McLeod, a climate resilience specialist at the Atlantic Council. The Washington think tank formed a group of public health experts, governments and nonprofits to push authorities to begin naming and categorizing heat waves, just as they do hurricanes, and to take other steps to better highlight the dangers.
"We've got to try something new and powerful to wake people up to this deadly threat," she said.
Climatologists say there is still time to slash the buildup of greenhouse gases that is warming the planet. But even with action, the carbon dioxide that has accumulated in the atmosphere is projected to deliver more dire heat extremes over the next few decades.
Consider the 2006 heat wave in California. In July of that year, hospitals along the coast were overwhelmed with patients as record-high temperatures settled over the state for nearly two weeks. Bodies piled up in coroners' offices in the Central Valley. Though state records showed that about 140 people died from the heat, researchers later estimated that there had been 650 deaths.
Scientists predict that this type of heat wave, the kind that once struck about every 50 years, is now occurring every 10 years. Across the state, extreme heat days -- defined as those with temperatures exceeding the 98th percentile -- are expected to be about four times more frequent in the next 20 years compared with historical levels. Deaths are projected to climb.
To study the shift, NASA's Hulley ranked California heat waves, indexing them by duration and intensity. He found that all of the state's worst heat waves have occurred since 2003. He also determined that the length of the state's heat season is rapidly expanding, with extremely hot temperatures showing up as early as March and lingering into September and October.
Since the mid-1980s, scientists have documented a shift to hotter, more humid nights, a lethal combination that prevents people from recovering after a day of soaring temperatures. Humid heat waves are more dangerous because muggy, moisture-laden air makes sweating less effective at shedding heat from the body through evaporation.
Environmentalists and other advocates see a disconnect between worsening heat waves and California's response. They say that, along with slashing emissions, the government can save lives by improving communication of the risks to the public and instituting community programs to check on neighbors who are isolated, elderly or medically fragile.
"We have a real challenge in front of us in how to get people to understand," said Kristie Ebi, a professor at the University of Washington's Center for Health and the Global Environment. "Yes, you've been through heat waves before. But these heat waves are hotter, they're more intense, they last longer, they're more deadly."
As of now, the National Weather Service bases heat advisories, watches and warnings on established thresholds, including the heat index, minimum and maximum temperatures and duration of heat.
But public health experts have long complained that the weather service's approach is too conservative and does not account for heat waves that may not exceed thresholds but nonetheless send people to the hospital.
In a 2014 study, scientists identified 19 heat waves in California that had landed more than 11,000 people in the hospital in 1999 and 2000. The weather service issued heat advisories for just six of the events.
The weather service has updated its approach in the Western U.S. in recent years by issuing advisories, watches and warnings using a new method that forecasts heat risks over the following seven days, using a color-coded scale like the air quality index. The online tool, however, is labeled as "experimental" and described as "supplementary to the official NWS heat watch/warning/advisory program."
Kimberly McMahon, public weather services program manager for the National Weather Service, said the tool, known as HeatRisk, was developed in response to a 2013 request from the California Office of Emergency Services. It pulls in a broader array of climate data, including unusually high and low forecast temperatures, the degree of cooling overnight and health data to account for populations that are more vulnerable to the heat.
McMahon said the weather service is working to simplify its messaging on the dangers of extreme heat as part of a "comprehensive strategy for conveying lifesaving heat information."
Researchers and health experts favor a more expansive alert system that warns the public about heat waves based not only on temperature thresholds but on the public health effects they're expected to cause, particularly to elderly and infirm people, outdoor workers and other sensitive populations.
"We know heat puts health at risk in vulnerable people well below temperatures that a heat alert would be given," said Dr. Aaron Bernstein, a pediatrician at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health.
In some areas, it does not take record-setting temperatures, or even summer weather, for heat to be lethal. Southern California is the only place in the U.S. where scientists have documented heat- related deaths during the winter, due to the hot, gusty Santa Ana winds. Though rare, these unseasonal heat waves are believed to be especially dangerous because they strike at a time when people are accustomed to cooler weather.
The temperature at which heat becomes life-threatening ranges widely, depending on local variables. In San Francisco -- where the climate is usually mild, and relatively few people have air conditioning -- a record-breaking heat wave during the 2017 Labor Day weekend that reached 106 degrees -- 37 degrees above average -- doubled the volume of 911 calls and killed several residents. The same temperature has a far less dramatic impact in Palm Springs, where air conditioning is widespread, and residents are acclimated to triple-digit temperatures.
Baughman McLeod -- who directs the Atlantic Council's Adrienne Arsht-Rockefeller Foundation Resilience Center -- said her organization is developing a system to assign heat waves names and categories, an effort aimed at pushing individuals and government officials to take the threat of extreme heat more seriously. L.A. County and Miami-Dade County are among the first areas where the group hopes to test such alerts.
Issuing names for heat waves at a national level would require the participation of the federal government. For now, the National Weather Service "does not have any plans to start naming heat waves," spokeswoman Jasmine Blackwell said.
 Graphic



End of Document


Newsom rolls out $15-billion climate plan; In shadow of fires, governor touts measure to mitigate risks from warming.
Los Angeles Times
September 24, 2021 Friday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN NEWS; Metro Desk; Part A; Pg. 1
Length: 1294 words
Byline: Hayley Smith, Tony Barboza
Body




Standing before a foil-wrapped, fireproofed monument in Sequoia National Park amid a haze of wildfire smoke, Gov. Gavin Newsom on Thursday signed a $15-billion climate package for California, the largest such investment in state history.
As ash from the nearby KNP Complex fire rained from an opaque sky, Newsom outlined the details of the package, which included investments in drought response, forest management and climate risk mitigation.
California in recent months has been hit with record-breaking heat, devastating drought and a wildfire season that has seen more than 2.35 million acres burned across the state -- a disastrous convergence of events that has been fueled by the burning of fossil fuels and threatens to become endemic to the region.
"We feel a deep sense of responsibility here in the state of California because of the smash-mouth realities of climate change," Newsom said. "Not just the issues of the acuity and frequency and duration of these wildfires, but also what's happening with this mega-drought over the entire West Coast of the United States."
The announcement arrived in tandem with Climate Week and the run-up to the United Nations Climate Change conference in Glasgow, Scotland, this fall.
Big-ticket items in the package include $5.2 billion for drought response and water resilience; $3.7 billion for issues like extreme heat and sea level rise; $3.9 billion for electric vehicle investment and infrastructure; $1.5 billion for wildfire response and forest resilience, and $1.1 billion for sustainable agriculture.
The aggregate items stem from the state's larger $262.6-billion budget, which also encompasses COVID-19 pandemic relief and a sweeping effort to address homelessness, among other top priorities.
But the effects of climate change on Thursday seemed most acute as Newsom signed the legislation under smoke-filled skies. The KNP Complex and the nearby Windy fires have for days threatened California's towering sequoia trees, which for many years were believed to be nearly impervious to fire.
Last week, officials were seen wrapping the General Sherman tree -- known as the largest tree in the world by volume -- in fire-resistant foil; a wrenching image in a fire-addled state.
"Here we are with these sentinels to our history," Newsom said. "You've got trees that quite literally date back to over 3,300 years ago. You can't rebuild a giant sequoia ... and that's why we're here with a deep sense of urgency."
But it's not only wildfire that has brought the region to its knees. California and four other Western states just recorded their hottest summer on record, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
One heat wave that blanketed the Pacific Northwest in June claimed the lives of hundreds, including immigrant farmworkers and the elderly. An estimated 1 billion sea creatures died because of heat off the coast, and the Sacramento River is facing a "near-complete loss" of young Chinook salmon because of abnormally warm waters.
And worsening drought conditions have seen many of the state's reservoirs shrink to near-record levels. Rainfall this year was a pittance and the snowpack, at its deepest, was only 59% percent of average, the California Department of Water Resources said.
Conditions became so dire that officials in August had to shut down a major hydroelectric power plant at Lake Oroville for the first time since its completion in 1967 on account of low water.
Newsom declared a drought emergency in April and expanded it to 50 counties in July, pleading with residents to voluntarily cut back on water consumption by 15%. Water officials in Southern California similarly declared a supply alert in August, urging residents to conserve vital resources.
So far, few have heeded that call, with Californians on average reducing water use by only 1.8% statewide during July.
But Newsom's consternation on Thursday was aimed not at residents but lawmakers in Washington, including many who so far have shown inaction on the issue of climate change.
"What more evidence do you need of a world that's heating up, our kids that are choking up, and a growing number of acres and communities and states burning up?" he said.
Newsom also criticized former President Trump for failing to fight climate change, noting that Trump said the answer to California's conflagrations was "buying more rakes."
It is increasingly important for the state to work closely with the federal government to manage its worsening wildfires. The federal government owns 57% of the forest land in California, and the state owns just 3%. The rest is in private hands.
Among the top priorities moving forward will be forest management, Newsom said -- including a renewed emphasis on prescribed burns, which have been credited with helping protect General Sherman and other sequoias in the Giant Forest from the flames of the KNP Complex fire.
Calling Thursday's legislation a "landmark bill," Assemblyman Richard Bloom (D-Santa Monica) said wildfire prevention and forest health are of critical importance.
"In the past, almost all of our funding to address wildfire has been to address suppressing the wildfire," he said -- something fire scientists have said led to an overabundance of vegetation that is now fueling many fires. "But we've spent very, very little" on prevention.
Natural Resources Secretary Wade Crowfoot said that much of the spending is necessary to cope with climate effects that are coming sooner than expected, and which scientists hadn't predicted to occur until decades from now. "We believed that this level of adaptation was decades into the future," Crowfoot said.
But that has pushed the administration to do more to reduce carbon pollution and to keep "people and natural places safe from climate change. So we no longer have the luxury of treating climate adaptation like planning."
Lauren Sanchez, the governor's senior climate advisor, described the billions in spending over the next three years as a new phase in the state's battle against climate change, saying Newsom has asked her and other leaders to "manage this crisis like the emergency it is."
"It's time to step up and meet this moment," Sanchez said. "It's time to stop talking and do what is required to leave our children the livable planet they so deserve."
Not everyone believed the state was doing enough however.
"Fifteen billion dollars is a lot of money, but if the Governor really wants to future-proof California as he said, then he must know that throwing money at the problem while continuing to approve new fossil fuel permits that are driving the climate chaos is nonsensical," said Amy Moas a senior climate campaigner for Greenpeace. "It is like trying to mop up an overflowing bathtub without first turning off the faucet."
On Thursday, Newsom also acknowledged that six of the seven largest wildfires in California have occurred since 2020, noting that "something is happening to the plumbing of the world."
Speaking of his childhood in California, the governor appeared choked up as he described some of the recent devastation, including the Dixie fire's leveling of the town of Greenville and the Caldor fire's destruction of Grizzly Flats.
"You can't deny your own eyes," he said, referring to those who question climate science. "This is not debatable any longer."
The twin blazes of the KNP Complex and the Windy fires on Thursday had burned more than 75,000 acres combined, spurring new evacuations for nearby residents as crews scrambled to protect homes and giant sequoias.
The emerging Fawn fire in Shasta County prompted its own evacuations on Thursday as it grew to more than 1,000 acres, spewing a massive plume of smoke over the dried-out hills.
--
Times staff writer Taryn Luna contributed to this report.
 Graphic



End of Document


CITY & STATE; Natural gas ban part of climate plan; Order for new homes, structures in Encinitas is most extensive in San Diego County.
Los Angeles Times
September 25, 2021 Saturday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: CALIFORNIA; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 1
Length: 1093 words
Byline: Rob Nikolewski, Nikolewski writes for the San Diego Union-Tribune.
Dateline:  ENCINITAS, CALIF.  
Body




The Encinitas City Council has passed a sweeping building ordinance that, with few exceptions, will eliminate installing natural gas infrastructure on new residential and commercial construction within city limits.
The ordinance, which passed on a 5-0 vote late Wednesday, is similar to other measures adopted by 49 other communities in California in recent years but most of those municipalities are in Northern California. The Encinitas ordinance is the most comprehensive ordinance passed by a community in San Diego County.
"We're really excited because we're doing our part, we care about climate change, we want to be a more environmentally committed city and we're doing everything we can to get there," Encinitas Mayor Catherine Blakespear said.
The exceptions are quite narrow and reserved for emergency buildings that are deemed essential facilities as defined by the California Health and Safety Code and construction in extreme scenarios for projects that would need significant utility upgrades.
Restaurants that demonstrate the need to cook with a flame also could qualify for an exception. Examples include eateries that use woks, pizza ovens and barbecue-themed restaurants. But if an exception is made, the restaurant must employ methods that will reduce the effects of the gas-fueled appliance's greenhouse gas.
When an exception is made, the new construction must be wired so it can transition to be electric-ready in the future.
The ordinance also applies to accessory dwelling units, commonly called granny flats.
"This is a very good ordinance that will essentially allow us to reduce our local greenhouse gases and air pollutants within our building structures, so it's a very good step forward," Encinitas City Council Member Joe Mosca said.
Blakespear said the ordinance will not lead to a steep rise in construction costs.
"For example, an electric water heater is about the same cost as a gas water heater so it actually is not supposed to add substantially to costs," she said. "If somebody is building a granny flat to their house, they have to put in electricity because you have to flick on the light. But if you don't have to run gas, it's actually cheaper because you then don't have [to install] infrastructure for the gas."
According to the California Air Resources Board, residential and commercial buildings are responsible for about 25% of the state's greenhouse gas emissions when accounting for fossil fuels consumed on-site and electricity demand. California has set a goal to derive 100% of its electricity from carbon-free sources by 2045 or sooner.
The Encinitas ordinance was supported by the San Diego Building Electrification Coalition, a partnership of environmental and public policy groups.
"It is clear there is no time for modest actions to address climate change and we need our cities to act boldly," Karinna Gonzalez of Hammond Climate Solutions said at a media briefing before the vote. "Adopting an all-electric ordinance is the first step to eliminating our dependency on fossil fuels."
But Kerry Jackson, a fellow at the Center for California Reform at the Pacific Research Institute, a think tank based in San Francisco that espouses free-market solutions to public policy issues, questioned the effectiveness of all-electric ordinances.
"If you permanently shut down fossil fuel use in all of California tomorrow, the impact on greenhouse gas emissions would be about zero," Jackson said. "This state puts out only about 1% of global greenhouse gas emissions. Meanwhile, China and India will be building dozens if not hundreds of coal plants in the coming years. There's nothing this state, not even this entire nation, can do to offset the increased emissions from those countries."
San Diego Gas & Electric, which includes natural gas as a crucial part of its energy portfolio, issued a statement about the Encinitas ordinance that promotes a broad approach to address the climate.
"Fighting climate change requires the widespread adoption of multiple strategies and technologies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions -- everything from stronger building codes and transportation electrification to energy storage and hydrogen innovations," SDG&E spokeswoman Helen Gao said in an email.
"SDG&E supports policies that are cost-effective and inclusive of all technologies with the potential to reduce [greenhouse gas] emissions. SDG&E has set an aggressive goal to achieve net-zero emissions by 2045, and we look forward to collaborating with Encinitas and other regional leaders to achieve this critical milestone."
SDG&E is a subsidiary of Sempra, which is also the parent company of the Southern California Gas Co., the largest natural gas distribution utility in the country.
In 2019, a coalition backed by the gas company and business groups lined up about 100 cities and counties that endorsed a push for "balanced energy solutions" that clean energy advocates said would slow local governments banning or discouraging gas hookups in new construction.
Southern California Gas also filed suit against the California Energy Commission last year, complaining that the commission failed to fulfill its legal requirement to report on the benefits of natural gas. The company and the commission quietly settled the lawsuit last month.
Details were not disclosed, but a spokeswoman for the energy commission told the Los Angeles Times the commission did not take the steps the gas company had sought.
Berkeley, in the summer of 2019,was the first city in the U.S. to adopt a ban on natural gas hookups for new construction.
Since then, communities including San Jose, Oakland and San Francisco have passed similar measures. The trend has not been as strong in Southern California, with the exception of Santa Monica, Ojai and now Encinitas.
Some cooks and chefs have said they prefer gas-powered ovens to electric. The California Restaurant Assn. has challenged Berkeley's ban on natural gas in new construction in court.
"This shouldn't need to be said, but the loss of flame cooking in restaurant settings would dramatically impact restaurant kitchens, where chefs rely on gas stoves to grill vegetables, sear meats and create meals of all kinds inspired by cuisines from all over the world," restaurant association Chief Executive Jot Condie said last month. "Any law mandating the use of electric rather than gas stoves reduces those choices, and is also likely to impact what restaurants pay for energy in the future."
The Encinitas ordinance will go into effect upon a second reading by the City Council, set for Oct. 13.
Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: ORDINANCES (92%); CITIES (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (90%); CONSTRUCTION LAW (90%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE (89%); GREENHOUSE GASES (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); BUILDING & HOUSING CODES (78%); CONSTRUCTION COSTS (78%); EMISSIONS (78%); GLOBAL WARMING (78%); HOUSING STARTS (78%); MAYORS (78%); NATURAL RESOURCES (78%); NEGATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); POLLUTION & ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS (75%); AIR QUALITY (73%); AIR POLLUTANTS (70%); AIR POLLUTION (70%); ENERGY DEMAND (67%); AIR QUALITY REGULATION (65%); ENCINITAS (CA) (%); HOUSING STARTS (%); BUILDING CODES (%); NATURAL GAS (%); PRODUCT BANS (%); GLOBAL WARMING (%)
 Company:  CALIFORNIA AIR RESOURCES BOARD (51%)
 Industry: SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (51%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS (99%); COMMERCIAL & INSTITUTIONAL CONSTRUCTION (90%); CONSTRUCTION (90%); CONSTRUCTION LAW (90%); NATURAL GAS (90%); NEW CONSTRUCTION (90%); REAL ESTATE (90%); RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION (90%); RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (90%); RESTAURANTS (90%); COMMERCIAL & RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (89%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (89%); NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING CONSTRUCTION (89%); BUILDING & HOUSING CODES (78%); CONSTRUCTION COSTS (78%); EMISSIONS (78%); GLOBAL WARMING (78%); HOUSING STARTS (78%); ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION & DISTRIBUTION (72%); ENERGY DEMAND (67%); THEME RESTAURANTS (67%)
 Geographic: SAN DIEGO, CA, USA (93%); CALIFORNIA, USA (95%)
 Load-Date: September 25, 2021

 

End of Document
CALIFORNIA DROUGHT; L.A. shifts water sources to help other regions; City turns to MWD's stored Colorado River supply to cut strain on State Water Project.
Los Angeles Times
October 6, 2021 Wednesday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: CALIFORNIA; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 1
Length: 1108 words
Byline: Ian James
Body




Cities in Southern California rely largely on water flowing through aqueducts from the Colorado River and the Sierra Nevada. But some parts of the region, such as Ventura County and northwestern L.A. County, don't have access to Colorado River water and depend entirely on the water that comes from the Sierra through the State Water Project.
With the project's supplies now severely limited because of the drought, Southern California's water agencies have begun shifting these precious supplies to areas that need it most, while Los Angeles is taking less from the State Water Project and instead receiving Colorado River water to fill the gaps.
Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti announced an agreement on Tuesday, saying the city's Department of Water and Power is assisting the region by taking less water from the State Water Project, helping to preserve those supplies so that other districts will get the water. In turn, Los Angeles is receiving additional Colorado River water that has been stored by the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California.
"This partnership is about more than how we respond in a dry year -- it's about how we prepare our region for tomorrow," Garcetti said.
Garcetti announced the city's participation in shifting water supplies during a news conference at the Los Angeles Reservoir, standing beside officials from the MWD and other water agencies. They urged people across Southern California to redouble their conservation efforts and continue to reduce water use.
The shift in water supplies by the Metropolitan Water District is making 20,000 more acre-feet of water available from the State Water Project for communities that don't have access to other supplies, and will make an additional 40,000 to 50,000 acre-feet available next year, said Gloria Gray, chairperson of the MWD board.
"That's water that is available for 150,000 homes. That's significant," Gray said.
This year, with California's largest reservoirs at some of their lowest levels ever, water agencies in Southern California received just 5% of their full allocations from the State Water Project.
"We're expecting to start next year with a 0% allocation," Gray said. "That means we need everyone throughout Southern California to look for ways to conserve water."
The region's water suppliers have managed through a very dry year, Gray said, thanks to shifts in operations, water stored in reserves and strides in conservation.
"But we're facing unprecedented conditions in our Northern California reservoirs, and next year could be an even bigger challenge," Gray said. "So we need everyone to work together to save water, particularly in communities that rely on the State Water Project."
The State Water Project delivers water from the Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta to farmlands and cities to the south. Built in the 1960s and early '70s, the project includes canals, pipelines, reservoirs and pumping facilities, which transport water to approximately 27 million Californians.
The Los Angeles Department of Water and Power receives a large portion of its water -- this year a projected 72% of the city's total water supplies -- through the MWD from the State Water Project and the Colorado River, both of which are seeing shortages.
For now, California's allotments of Colorado River water haven't been cut back like those of Arizona and Nevada, but that could change as the water level of Lake Mead continues to decline toward more severe shortage levels.
Anselmo Collins, the DWP's senior assistant general manager of the water system, pointed out that behind them, on the surface of the reservoir, were floating plastic shade balls. These balls were rolled into the reservoir by the thousands to ensure water quality, and they also reduce evaporation. Collins described the water-shifting agreement as another sort of collaborative innovation to safeguard water supplies.
Collins said MWD's managers suggested shifting demands away from the State Water Project, and managers at the DWP readily agreed.
"We believe this is a great partnership. It helps everybody out," Collins said. Working together in this way, he said, "we are able to strengthen our regional water supply."
He added that Angelenos "should rest assured that this partnership with Metropolitan, it is not going to affect the reliability, the water quality or the cost-effectiveness of the water that we provide."
Areas in Southern California that rely heavily or entirely on the State Water Project include northwestern L.A. County and Ventura County, parts of the San Gabriel Valley and parts of the Inland Empire. According to the MWD, 6.5 million people live in areas that are dependent on the State Water Project.
Shifting supplies in this way "helps preserve the limited state water supplies that are a lifeline to Ventura County," said Steve Blois, president of Calleguas Municipal Water District's board. "This persistent drought is dictating that we all must work together to explore the full capabilities of our water systems."
Jay Lewitt, president of Las Virgenes Municipal Water District's board, said his agency's area in western L.A. County gets nearly all its water from the State Water Project.
"Our customers, who are doing a great job conserving, they need to be prepared to significantly reduce their water usage," Lewitt said. "For our agency, nearly 70% of residential water use is for outdoor irrigation. This is where the biggest savings can be found."
Gov. Gavin Newsom in July called for all Californians to voluntarily reduce water use by 15%.
Though California naturally undergoes swings between dry spells and deluges, higher temperatures brought on by climate change are making droughts more intense.
The snowpack this year in the northern Sierra Nevada, which feeds the state's reservoirs, peaked at 72% of average in April, and then rapidly melted during the hottest spring on record. Extreme heat has baked much of the West and left the soils parched, which has soaked up a portion of the runoff and left diminished flows in rivers.
"Angelenos stepped up the last time we asked them to conserve water," during the 2012-16 drought, Garcetti said. "We don't know what next year holds, so we need to make water conservation a way of life."
People in L.A. and other cities in the West have reduced water use significantly over the years, even as populations have grown. Water use in Los Angeles over the past five years was lower than in the 1970s, according to the DWP. Los Angeles now depends mostly on imported water, drawing an estimated 16% this year from local sources. But Garcetti has touted a goal of shifting to 70% local water sources by 2035.
 Graphic


 
End of Document


EXTREME HEAT; AC can mean life or death; Utilities offer assistance programs, but for one family, financial help to install a unit didn't arrive in time
Los Angeles Times
October 10, 2021 Sunday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: CALIFORNIA; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 1
Length: 1367 words
Byline: Ruben Vives
Dateline:  CATHEDRAL CITY, CALIF.  
Body




Cory Hammond pleaded with his parents to come stay with him in mid-August of 2020, when they were living without air conditioning in this desert community just east of Palm Springs.
Forecasters had issued an excessive-heat warning -- of temperatures up to 118 degrees.
"You have all sorts of thoughts that run through your mind," Hammond said, recalling his conversations with his parents, Sandra and Richard Hammond. "You know the heat is coming. You know it's miserable."
That week, the elderly couple used a swamp cooler and fans to try to cool their home. Their central air-conditioning unit was broken, and they couldn't afford to replace it.
But there was hope of relief through a utility program that offered low-income customers free energy-saving improvements and appliances, including air conditioners.
The salvation they sought, however, did not come in time. Fans and the swamp cooler -- a device that blows air over evaporating water -- also proved to be inadequate for the heat. And after a week of triple-digit temperatures in Cathedral City, 78-year-old Sandra Hammond died from heatstroke.
As heat waves intensify, access to air conditioning can mean life or death for people in California and other states. Federal data show that poor families have a far lower rate of air-conditioning units in their homes than the average family, and even when they have AC, they are reluctant to use it or get equipment fixed, because of the cost.
That was the situation for the Hammonds, who lived on a fixed income. Even when their central air unit worked, they rarely used it.
"They would only run it on the super hot days just to help kind of take off some of the heat," Hammond said. "So while you may be able to find some grace to repair [it], you're still looking at a $400 or $500 electric bill."
Two potential lifelines exist for such families. One is the federal Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program, which is administered by state agencies. Congress has slashed its funding the last decade, from $5.1 billion in 2009 to $3.7 billion in 2021, and experts say much of the remaining funding is focused on helping people winterize their homes, not cool them in the hotter months.
In California, utility companies offer the Energy Savings Assistance (ESA) program, which is funded by ratepayers. The program seeks to improve energy efficiency and ventilation for low-income households. The Hammonds had enrolled in that program.
Last year, the COVID-19 pandemic caused regulators to temporarily suspend the program in March, and the Hammonds were forced to wait during one of the hottest summers on record.
Extreme heat is part of life here, and Sandra Hammond learned to adapt to it. She was born in Portland, Ore., and later moved to Seattle, one of the wettest cities in the country. That was where she gave birth to her only child, Cory.
In the early 1970s, he and his mother moved to the Coachella Valley, to be close to family. It was there she met and married Richard Hammond, a roofer who had spent about 50 years working outdoors.
"So he was used to the heat," Cory Hammond said.
The mother and son gradually adjusted to the desert climate. The summers were "atrocious," Hammond, 52, recalled, but in other months, he grew to love the desert's beauty, the "clear skies, clean air and nice mountains."
Over the years, Hammond and his mother began to take note of changes in the region's climate. The normal summer heat waves were stretching into the fall and winter.
"It used to be that in August and September you'd start seeing some cooling trends," Hammond said.
Temperatures have been climbing steadily for the last few years in the Coachella Valley, toppling records that were set a half-century ago, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the National Weather Service.
Ivory Small, a meteorologist with the San Diego National Weather Service, said that within the last 20 years, seven of the 10 hottest Julys on record have occurred in the Coachella Valley. A similar warming trend is happening in other nearby areas, and that pattern, he said, is "going to continue for a while."
With heat waves becoming hotter, longer and more frequent, Hammond was grateful upon hearing that his mother's friend had enrolled his parents that July in the state ESA program through Southern California Edison.
He hoped the program would provide his parents with air conditioning that summer, but what he didn't know was that Edison, from March until June that year, had suspended "face-to-face interactions" between its contractors and customers due to the governor's stay-at-home pandemic order. Among those caught in this backlog were his parents.
In 2018, the utility saw more than 86,000 customers enroll in the program. The following year it jumped to more than 95,000. Last year, due to the pandemic, about 60,000 customers enrolled.
The utility expects the enrollment numbers to climb again after the pandemic is over, and it will see its budget grow from $65 million this year to more than $80 million. Overall, it proposed to spend more than $390 million on the program for the next five years.
On Aug. 18, 2020, Sandra Hammond suffered heatstroke. Richard Hammond, who was at home with her, had been asleep, thinking his wife was also napping.
The friend, the same one who helped enroll the couple in the program, stopped by to check on them and noticed Sandra Hammond was struggling to breathe. She dialed 911, and paramedics transported Hammond to Desert Regional Medical Center in Palm Springs, according to Cory Hammond and a Riverside County coroner's autopsy report.
Hammond said his mother was revived at least twice, once on the way to the hospital and again in the emergency room.
The autopsy report said his mother's body temperature was 106 degrees when she arrived at the hospital.
Hammond said he was unaware of what had happened to his mother until he got a call from the hospital. He and his father couldn't visit because of COVID-19 restrictions.
The next day, doctors told him his mother couldn't wake from a coma and needed to consider a "do not resuscitate" order.
"So at that stage, it's a family wrestling decision," he said. "Do you give them a fighting chance or do you not?"
Hammond said he gave his mother a chance. The medical staff took care of her until they couldn't do any more. The hospital allowed him and his family to see her one last time. He said his mother held on long enough for everyone to say farewell.
"I'm just very thankful I was able to see her," he said.
After his mother's funeral, Hammond's focus turned to his father, who was still at the house as the heat waves continued.
Hammond said it wasn't until January that they received an update on his parents' enrollment in the ESA program.
Diane Castro, a spokeswoman with Southern California Edison, said that in order to protect the privacy of its customers the company could not provide information about program enrollment or account history.
Hammond said his parents qualified for an energy-saving refrigerator, evaporative cooler and central air conditioner replacement.
In February, Hammond said, an independent contractor with Southern California Edison showed up to assess his father's property.
Then came more setbacks.
Hammond said the contractor didn't do rooftop installations of evaporative coolers. When Hammond suggested it be placed on the bedroom window, they found they couldn't because there was only one window in the room and it created a fire hazard.
State and municipal codes require that a bedroom must have at least two escape routes in case of an emergency.
Then there was the central air unit outside. Hammond said it couldn't be installed because the contractor told him it required 3-foot clearance from the neighbor's fence line.
In the end, he said his father got a new fridge, and later, a small AC window unit from a private company, not affiliated with the ESA program. Hammond said he's still trying to find a way to replace the central air unit through the program.
In the meantime, he's tried to persuade his dad to live with him, but hasn't succeeded yet.
"I'm trying to prevent losing my father the same way."
--
On Tuesday: Part two of this investigative series.
 Graphic



End of Document


BUSINESS; State, SoCalGas settle climate lawsuit; The Sempra Energy unit is a powerful opponent of efforts to eliminate natural gas.
Los Angeles Times
September 8, 2021 Wednesday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN NEWS; Business Desk; Part A; Pg. 1
Length: 1540 words
Byline: Sammy Roth
Body




A fight between the nation's largest gas utility and California's influential climate change regulators has reached a quiet conclusion -- but it won't be the last such battle as the Golden State hurries to eliminate heat-trapping fossil fuels.
Southern California Gas Co. and the California Energy Commission agreed to settle a lawsuit brought by the Los Angeles-based utility company. SoCalGas had claimed state officials were flouting a law requiring them to consider the benefits of natural gas -- one of the fossil fuels responsible for the worsening fires, floods and heat waves of the climate crisis.
The company agreed to drop the suit even though the agency didn't take the steps it demanded and has no plans to do so, Energy Commission spokesperson Lindsay Buckley said. She didn't provide details of the settlement, which was finalized Aug. 26.
"Transitioning away from an economy that is based on fossil fuels is a necessary challenge and requires constructive dialogue and creative thinking that happens when all parties are at the table working cooperatively," David Hochschild, who was appointed by Gov. Gavin Newsom to chair the Energy Commission, said in a written statement.
SoCalGas wouldn't say specifically why it agreed to drop the lawsuit, filed last year in Orange County Superior Court. Asked about the settlement, company spokesperson Christine Detz said the Energy Commission "is holding workshops and studying scenarios to help the state reach its greenhouse gas emissions goals, including the role that clean fuels like hydrogen and renewable natural gas will play."
"We appreciate the broad and inclusive process the [commission] is taking and look forward to working together toward our shared goals," Detz said in an email.
As California looks beyond coal -- which will soon be eliminated from its power supply -- it's seeking out strategies for replacing natural gas, which is cleaner than coal and oil but still fuels climate change and releases lung-damaging air pollution.
SoCalGas has emerged as a powerful opponent of that push.
A coalition backed by the gas company and other business groups persuaded more than 100 cities and counties to pass resolutions calling for "balanced" energy policies -- an attempt to slow the tide of local governments banning or discouraging gas hookups in new construction. Clean-energy advocates say replacing gas heaters and stoves with electric appliances will not only reduce planet-warming emissions but also limit indoor gas leaks that research shows can contribute to asthma and heart disease.
The gas company also questioned the rationale behind the Energy Commission's recent decision to encourage all-electric buildings statewide. The commission stopped short of banning gas in new construction, but approved rules that will require developers to include wiring that allows for later installation of electric heat pumps and cooktops. In written comments to the state agency, SoCalGas suggested the regulations could make housing more expensive and lead to higher energy bills.
The company says its pipelines are crucial for confronting the climate crisis, arguing that slashing emissions from power plants, vehicles and homes will be far easier and cheaper if fuels such as hydrogen and renewable gas are subbed in for fossil gas. Many climate experts and advocates are skeptical, arguing that an electric grid powered by solar panels, wind turbines and batteries is the best solution for cleaning up pollution across most parts of the economy.
SoCalGas serves 21.8 million customers from the San Joaquin Valley to the U.S.-Mexico border and brought in $4.7 billion in operating revenue last year. Its corporate sibling, San Diego Gas & Electric, also has an extensive pipeline network.
Both utilities are owned by Sempra Energy of San Diego, which is investing billions of dollars in export terminals to take natural gas produced in the United States and send it overseas. Sempra opposes a proposal in the state Legislature, Assembly Bill 1395, that would require California to slash its planet-warming carbon dioxide emissions to 90% below 1990 levels by 2045 -- a target roughly in line with what scientists say is needed globally to avoid the most devastating consequences of a rapidly heating planet.
Sempra "is just very much wedded to natural gas being part of reducing emissions," said Daniel Stewart, a program manager at As You Sow, a nonprofit that works with corporate shareholders to advocate for stronger climate action.
Joining SoCalGas in its lawsuit against the Energy Commission was Clean Energy Fuels Corp., a Newport Beach company that owns natural gas fueling stations. The Times and nonprofit news outlet Floodlight reported last month that a campaign firm being paid by Clean Energy Fuels had hired unsuspecting local residents near the ports of L.A. and Long Beach to argue for natural gas-fueled trucks, rather than zero-emission electric trucks, as the best solution for cleaning up dirty air at the ports.
Clean Energy Fuels declined to comment on the lawsuit settlement. A company executive previously told The Times that he didn't know anything about the campaign firm paying local residents during the debate at the ports in 2017.
"We support California's environmental goals and efforts to reduce carbon emissions from the energy and transportation systems. However, achieving those goals does not require minimizing the role of natural gas," Clean Energy Fuels spokesperson Raleigh Gerber said in a written statement last year, when the lawsuit against the Energy Commission was filed.
Also joining the lawsuit were three chapters of the Utility Workers Union of America, collectively representing nearly 5,000 SoCalGas employees, many of whom could lose their jobs if the state successfully phases out gas pipelines.
An attorney representing the three chapters -- UWUA Locals 132, 483 and 522 -- didn't respond to an email asking about the settlement. But in a written statement when the lawsuit was filed, the presidents of the three locals argued that state officials had "embarked on a self-guided excursion into fuels policy that, contrary to law, would minimize the use of natural gas."
"We are advocates for making the best use of all available fuels, consistent with the goal of dramatically reducing the carbon footprint of our advanced economy," they said at the time. "Substituting electricity for natural gas in some applications may make sense, but an unexamined assumption that this is always the case and should always guide policy defies common sense."
The law firm representing SoCalGas in the suit was Sullivan & Cromwell, which received an F grade in a climate change "scorecard" released last month by Law Students for Climate Accountability. The report assigned letter grades to the country's 100 most prestigious law firms based on their clients, with more work on behalf of fossil fuel companies leading to a worse score and any work on behalf of renewable energy companies potentially lessening the harshness of the decree.
Sullivan & Cromwell representatives didn't respond to an email seeking comment on the F grade.
In a related legal fight, a federal judge recently dismissed a lawsuit brought by the California Restaurant Assn. against the city of Berkeley, which in 2019 approved the nation's first ban on gas hookups in most new buildings. The restaurant group appealed last month. The case is seen as an early test of whether dozens of similar policies in other cities will survive legal scrutiny.
"The loss of flame cooking in restaurant settings would dramatically impact restaurant kitchens, where chefs rely on gas stoves to grill vegetables, sear meats and create meals," Jot Condie, president of the restaurant association, said in a written statement.
Climate activists have long suspected the gas industry of funding the lawsuit. In a news release sent on behalf of Earthjustice and the Sierra Club this summer, public affairs firm Sunstone Strategies pointed to a newly filed disclosure form showing SoCalGas paid nearly $1.8 million last year to Reichman Jorgensen, the law firm representing the restaurant association. SoCalGas also increased its contributions to the nonprofit associated with the restaurant association to $146,000 in 2020 from $24,000 in 2019.
Detz, the gas company spokesperson, said the payments to Reichman Jorgensen are "unrelated" to the firm's work on the gas ban lawsuit. The firm "provides legal support to our General Counsel's office, among other legal activities," Detz said in an email.
As for SoCalGas' donations to the associated nonprofit, restaurant association spokesperson Sharokina Shams said in an email that utility companies Pacific Gas & Electric and SDG&E have also donated, with the money funding "hardship grants to small restaurants and to restaurant workers." SoCalGas spokesperson Chris Gilbride pointed to the COVID-19 pandemic's impact.
"We're proud of the work we've done to support these small businesses over the last year and to help the restaurant industry get back on its feet," Gilbride said in a written statement earlier this year.
Sarah Jorgensen, a founding partner at Reichman Jorgensen, said it would be unethical to discuss fee arrangements with clients.
 Graphic



End of Document


COLUMN ONE; Fishermen sail choppy waters of climate change; What happens when wells run dry and the fishing season is cut short?
Los Angeles Times
September 1, 2021 Wednesday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Los Angeles Times All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN NEWS; Metro Desk; Part A; Pg. 1
Length: 1730 words
Byline: Hailey Branson-Potts
Dateline:  FORT BRAGG, CALIF  
Body




Not everyone believed in Captain Dan.
Other fishermen chuckled when he started giving boat tours of Noyo Harbor. Who would pay for a ride in a busy port, with its foul-mouthed sailors, its harbor seals clamoring for discarded fish guts, its vessels with names like Kraken and Dirty White Boat?
But in this Northern California harbor town of 7,300 people, Dan Platt -- a skipper with a salt-and-pepper mustache, quiet demeanor and affinity for being alone on the ocean -- became the epitome of rural reinvention. About five years after he began, rides on his 18-foot Duffy boat, the Noyo Star, are booked almost every day.
Platt certainly didn't guess life would turn out this way.
But the planet is warming, and the waters are changing. Rising ocean temperatures have upended marine ecosystems. Drought and record-breaking heat are drying up the rivers where salmon hatch before migrating to the sea.
"I kind of figured the tours would be my retirement when I finally do retire from fishing," said the 61-year-old Platt, who has spent his entire adult life commercial fishing. "It got to the point where I'm doing so many tours, I don't have any time to go fishing any more."
Along the economically distressed rural North Coast -- where the future lies not in the fishing and logging jobs that once defined it but, increasingly, in tourism -- climate change has forced those who live by the rod and the reel to consider their options.
Mendocino County is experiencing its worst drought on record, and residents' wells are running dry. Flows in the Noyo River -- Fort Bragg's main source of drinking water in the summer -- hit record lows this year. And it is increasingly salty thanks to rising sea levels and occasional "king tides," exceptionally high tides which push farther inland when the river runs low.
Fishing and diving seasons have become shorter and more tightly restricted, if they happen at all.
Early last month, Platt, who is known to his guests as Captain Dan, squeezed in two days of fishing aboard his commercial boat, the Zhivago, a converted Coast Guard vessel, as the salmon season opened. His hands were cut and raw. But the fish were biting -- and a good day on the water can still bring in as much money as a week's worth of tours.
Platt said out-of-town fishermen had been flocking to Fort Bragg and he was "leaving the fish to them" because he had so many tours. Previous salmon seasons have been canceled. Everyone knows there's no guarantee.
"I wouldn't be surprised if they actually shut it down," he said. "If the drought continues. If we don't get some rain."
As fishing becomes more tightly regulated, some have given up and sold their boats. Others now cast their nets for different kinds of fish. Laura Miller -- whose salmon troller, the Animal Fair, docks on the Noyo River -- started selling handmade jewelry on Etsy last year.
"It was a way of diversifying," said Miller, 44.
She and business partner Rich Holmes mostly used to harvest red urchin, until that fishery collapsed. They've fished for black cod, rockfish, hagfish and "dabbled in tuna."
"The life of a modern fisherman -- you have to be open to change and try new things," Miller said.
They're mostly relying upon salmon now. But as the drought dries the rivers those fish depend upon, that feels fragile.
"We just really love being out on the ocean and that lifestyle," said Holmes, 68. "We're hoping to continue doing it for many years to come; it's just beautiful out there. But it feels scary. ... I think quite a bit of change is in the future."
Holmes and Miller sell fish to the public directly off their boat. On his tours, Platt passes out their business card; they do the same for him.
Holmes initially thought the workaday Noyo Harbor wouldn't be a tourist destination. Turns out Captain Dan was right. "Dan's timing was really pretty decent," he said with a laugh.
Just as Platt was launching his boat tours, a chain reaction of environmental stressors began throwing the Northern California marine ecosystem into chaos.
In 2013, starfish began dying en masse from the mysterious sea star wasting syndrome. The plague wiped out huge sunflower sea stars, one of the main predators of purple urchins, a voracious creature nicknamed the "zombie urchin" that eats everything in its path, including rocks.
The purple urchin population exploded along the North Coast, and the urchins devoured kelp at the same time the so-called blob, a mass of warm seawater in the Pacific, made the water too hot for the kelp to thrive. Once-flourishing kelp forests -- a critical habitat for abalone, fish and other creatures -- are now vast urchin barrens, stretches of denuded ocean floor covered in spiny purple orbs.
The region's once-lucrative red urchin fishery collapsed and received federal disaster relief. Abalone diving, which brought people from all over the world to the Sonoma and Mendocino county coasts, was cut off in 2018 and is banned until at least 2026.
Over the last few years, Sheila Semans, executive director of the Noyo Center for Marine Science, has had stunned divers whose favorite abalone spots are now urchin barrens sit in her office and weep.
The Noyo Center now collaborates with other organizations, like Reef Check, and universities, sending divers -- including red urchin commercial divers who needed work -- to remove purple urchins by hand.
Although red urchin typically provide uni for sushi restaurants, purple urchin are edible too. Conservation groups and companies are now taking smaller purple urchins from the barrens to carefully monitored "ranches" where they are fattened up before being sold as seafood.
"We're in this weird period of time where what is right from an economic standpoint is also right from an environmental standpoint," Semans said. "We need to make a new fishery out of these purple urchin."
"It's so much change, and for these small rural communities, it takes so much longer to adapt," she said.
For decades, many rural communities like Fort Bragg that once relied upon natural resource-based industries -- like fishing, logging or mining -- have tried to pivot to tourism, including plans to build a new marine science center on the site of the struggling lumber town's last sawmill. It's not an easy transition.
"The jobs that tourism brings, large proportions are service-industry jobs, are seasonal or part time, and don't lift a family above the poverty line," said Jennifer Sherman, an associate professor of sociology at Washington State University who focuses on rural communities.
Fort Bragg is trying to become a tourist town even as tensions rise between locals -- who are being asked to cut back water use during the drought -- and visitors who use a lot of it.
On a recent weekend, nearly every hotel in town was completely booked. Lines formed outside the fish and chip joints along the river. Boat slips were filled with out-of-town vessels at the start of the salmon season.
Pickup trucks parked by the harbor bore bumper stickers with credos like: "No Farmed Salmon in Eureka!" and "Support Local Fishermen. DEMAND Wild California King Salmon."
Aboard the Noyo Star, Platt sailed visitors on the river's blue-green water at about 3 mph, the waves gently lapping against his boat.
The pragmatic seafarer is more reserved than a typical tour guide. But people are still romantic about fishing, so he describes the mechanics of the boats in the harbor and explains what commercial fishing entails.
On a recent afternoon, Paul Batterson, 80, of Sacramento County, climbed off Platt's boat behind his four grandchildren, ages 7 to 14.
He had spent months teaching them supplemental history lessons while they were distance-learning during the pandemic. The most recent lessons were about the history of food, and Platt's boat served as the perfect classroom.
They talked about the urchin business, about rock cod and sablefish.
"We saw it in action," Batterson said. "They saw fishing boats coming in, they saw fishing boats getting unloaded at the docks, they saw fishing boats getting fuel."
Other tour-goers are fleeing wildfire smoke farther inland and seeking outdoor activities amid the pandemic.
"It's been amazingly good," Platt said. "I meet a lot of people."
He was especially relieved to have the tours to complement his fishing income last year. He had a hard time selling fish with so many restaurants shut down during the pandemic.
Platt spent his early childhood in Southern California, where his father, a collegiate physical education teacher, was outspoken about his opposition to the Vietnam War and the draft. His father's school told him to "cool it or leave," Platt said. So, he packed up his family, moved to the North Coast, and bought a commercial fishing boat.
As a young man in the 1980s, Platt spent years aboard boats in Alaska. That was back when crabbing in the Last Frontier was like a gold rush on the sea -- before the Alaskan king crab population suddenly plunged, sending crews into bankruptcy.
Ultimately, he came back to Fort Bragg because he had two young daughters. When he was home, he carried his babies in backpacks to take them fishing. He put the girls through diving lessons and cooked seafood, as fresh as could be. But he was missing too many Christmases.
"Talk to them now, and they'll tell you, 'Dad wasn't around very much when we were growing up,'" he said. "I'm trying to make up for it now."
He runs Noyo Harbor Tours with daughter Kristin, 32, who handles the booking, answering calls from early morning to midnight. She carries a tide book everywhere she goes, planning trips around the waves.
Kristin and her father are close, even though, for her and her sister, his long absences when they were children were "kind of annoying to us, to be honest."
Just as Captain Dan learned how to fish with his dad, she learned how to run a tour business with hers. She sees it as a family business that lasts "years and years."
She has a hard time imagining life away from the water, despite how fickle and troubled it can be in these times.
"The ocean is part of me," she said.
On a recent afternoon, as Platt steered through the harbor, his phone kept buzzing: Sunset tour booked. Afternoon tour booked.
Platt suddenly pointed at the water, delighted. "Look! There's a harbor seal. Right in front of us. Just kinda chilling there in the water."
Even after a lifetime aboard boats, the water has not lost its wonder.
 Graphic



End of Document
