Low oxygen levels along coast a 'silent' crisis; Hypoxic areas off Oregon arrived this summer, exacerbated by climate change
Times Colonist (Victoria, British Columbia)
October 1, 2021 Friday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2021 Times Colonist All Rights Reserved
Section: LIFE; Pg. C3
Length: 1222 words
Byline: Michala Garrison, The Seattle Times
Dateline: Seattle 
Body




SEATTLE - Nearly two decades ago, fishers discovered an odd occurrence off the coast of Oregon. They were pulling up pots of dead or lethargic crabs.
At first they suspected a chemical spill or a red tide. But instead, they learned, dangerously low levels of dissolved oxygen in the ocean water were to blame.
The crabs had suffocated. These swaths of hypoxic areas have surfaced every summer on Pacific Northwest shores since it was first recorded in 2002. They are spurred by naturally occurring coastal upwellings and algae blooms, exacerbated by climate change, said Francis Chan, director of the Cooperative Institute for Marine Resources Studies at Oregon State University.
Akin to fire season, hypoxia season arrived earlier this year - the earliest start in 20 years, according to Chan. But unlike wildfire, or other visible climate emergencies, it has gone largely unrecognized.
"It's kind of a silent problem happening out there," said Chan. "This year, I can look out and see trees with one side burnt because of the heat wave. As I'm driving on McKenzie highway, I can see Mount Jefferson has no snow on it. But when you drive out to the ocean, it looks exactly the same as last summer."
The coasts of Washington and Oregon are part of the California Current Large Marine Ecosystem which extends from Mexico to Canada. The ecosystem is highly dynamic as each spring and summer, northerly wind systems blow southward and push the upper layer of the ocean offshore. It gets replaced by water from deeper depths that is rich in nutrients and helps fuel the productivity of the West Coast. This process is known as coastal upwelling.
The upwelled water has lower levels of dissolved oxygen because the deep water has spent such a long time isolated from the atmosphere. The wealth of nutrients encourages strong phytoplankton blooms, also known as marine algae, which eventually decomposes - a process that further consumes oxygen from the water - leaving the nearshore water with even lower oxygen levels that can lead to marine creatures suffocating.
"How long can you hold your breath?" posed Jenny Waddell, a research co-ordinator at the Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary. "Other than marine mammals who breathe at the surface, pretty much everything else in the ocean is using dissolved oxygen for their life."
Typically, hypoxic conditions haven't arrived to the nearshore until mid-June or July. This year hypoxic conditions were reported in April with the upwelling season beginning in March. To get a sense of why an early beginning to the upwelling season is concerning, Chan compared it to the summer drought season. "Say we expected rainfall lasting until March but the rain stops in February. That's all the water we have. We have to last until next year."
Similarly, if upwelling starts a month earlier than usual, the amount of oxygen, already low, has to last until the fall when storms promote mixing which adds oxygen back into the system.
Chan said as of late September, upwelling is still occurring and low levels of oxygen are still persisting.
Climate change is playing a role in worsening oxygen levels. Simply put, warmer water holds less oxygen because the oxygen molecules are moving faster and are more likely to escape from the surface. A little more complicated, climate change is altering the structure of the oceans as the warmer upper layer is more buoyant than the cooler, deeper, already oxygenpoor ocean layer. The warmer upper layer keeps the deeper layer from "taking a breath," explained Chan.
On a global scale, the oceans are already losing oxygen. Take this and add local factors like coastal upwelling and phytoplankton bloom decomposition off Washington and Oregon coasts, and you have a system with severely low oxygen levels.
While upwelling ecosystems such as the CCLME were once thought as resilient in the face of climate change because of their dynamic nature, they have quickly and quietly become places scientists say will be hit hard by changing conditions.
Scientists are busy monitoring the problem and collecting as much data as possible. But the deaths of marine creatures have alarmed not only scientists, but coastal tribes, whose livelihoods rely on the ocean.
There are no records of reoccurring low-oxygen levels like scientists have observed since 2002, despite over 50 years of oceanic monitoring. Joe Schumacker, a marine resource scientist for the Quinault Indian Nation, said there is also nothing within the Quinault traditional knowledge about large-scale marine die-offs that would suggest oxygen levels were as low as observed today. In 2017, the hypoxic event was so severe, Schumacker remembers shores regularly lined with dead fish and shellfish that summer. The International Pacific Halibut Commission also found there was zero or a very low catch of Pacific halibut during that hypoxic event.
The marine sanctuary, where Waddell works, has collected oceanic data through moorings for 22 years. Moorings are like buoys with special instruments that collect data such as temperature, salinity, water direction, chlorophyll and oxygen levels off the coast of the Olympic Peninsula.
The data from the moorings are one of the longest records scientists have in this region of the world that document numerous oceanic characteristics.
This data set is one of many that are used to verify two regional forecast models, J-SCOPE and LiveOcean, for Washington and Oregon coastal waters that Samantha Siedlecki, former researcher at University of Washington and a current professor at University of Connecticut, was pivotal in developing. The forecasts predict important ocean characteristics such as the timing of upwelling to the amount of dissolved oxygen in the ocean.
Both Waddell and Schumacker said they saw the forecasts predicting early upwelling and low oxygen levels this summer.
"When I think about hypoxia, it makes me really, really concerned to be frank because it's something that we're still not quite sure about all of the dynamics associated with it," Waddell said. "We're trying to figure that out."
She said she sees coastal treaty tribes, such as the Quinault, being on the front lines of climate change. "There is no part of the marine sanctuary that lies outside of treatyprotected tribal fishing areas," explained Waddell.
Schumacker said Indigenous fishing treaty rights to the ocean in Washington exists nowhere else in the United States.
"These treaty rights to harvest 50% of the harvestable fish and shellfish are legally defined within these certain boxes out here," Schumacker said, referring to the boundaries of the tribal fishing area.
"So, it's not like they can go anywhere else to fish. Should things go bad, they are limited immediately by that box that defines where the treaty exists."
The Quinault people, he said, take it seriously to not only understand the impacts of climate change, but to adapt as well.
"They are a fishing people. All of the tribes here in the Pacific Northwest are fishing people. They have to continue to fish," said Schumacker.
Waddell said she is encouraged by the number of concerned young people and undergraduates who have reached out about studying the issue.
"I don't want to be negative or depressing. But yeah, it's going to take all of us making an effort to address this in any meaningful way," she said.
 Graphic



 
Dreamstime; Yaquina Bay in Newport, Oregon, one of the major Dungeness crab fishing towns in the state.; 
Classification



End of Document


Climate change threatens health in Northwest
The Register Guard (Eugene, Oregon)
September 22, 2019 Sunday

 Copyright 2019 The Register Guard
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 1140 words
Byline: Ryan Blethen The Seattle Times, The Register-Guard, Eugene, Ore.
Body




SEATTLE  2019--SEATTLE -- Around this time last year, news outlets blared alarming headlines: Breathing the air outside was as bad as smoking several cigarettes. Wildfire haze blotted out the sun and turned the moon orange. Weather apps simply listed the forecast as "smoke."
Just because this summer has been clear, though, doesn't mean that the environment is doing just fine.
While smoke from wildfires might be climate change's most obvious impact in Washington, other threats still loom. Some predicted health effects include heatstroke, dehydration, worsened pollen allergies and increased cancer risk. And while local scientists have a plan to fix it, they say they are concerned that no one is carrying it out.
Meanwhile, climate scientists predict more smoky summers. On Wednesday, the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) released a study that found that during one year, wildfire smoke in Washington state caused 245 deaths, directly and indirectly. The study pegged the costs of those "premature deaths" at $2.2 billion, and $55 million spent dealing with associated illnesses.
The NRDC study examined climate-change-related events in 10 states in 2012 and was an attempt to put a dollar figure on how climate change is harming people's health. Researchers arrived at the figures by looking at published, peer-reviewed literature and state and federal agency reports.
Wisconsin, not a state normally associated with being hot, logged 27 deaths from extreme heat in 2012, according to the NRDC study. The state nestled between Minnesota and the Great Lakes suffered through record high temperatures for a week that summer.
"I'm seeing things that I did not think would happen until 2050," said Dr. Kristie Ebi, a professor in the Department of Global Health at the University of Washington. "Climate change is coming at us much faster, and the speed of change and how that's going to affect extreme events is going to be very problematic." Heat waves and floods are becoming more frequent and intense sooner than expected, she said.
Climate change has ravaged other parts of the country with extreme heat, catastrophic flooding and an ever-expanding range of illnesses spread by mosquitoes, fleas and ticks. While the effects have been milder in the Pacific Northwest, "We're not going to be immune forever," said Dr. Jeff Duchin, public-health officer for Public Health -- Seattle & King County.
Climate change, like an increase in warmer days, hit the region's most vulnerable populations hard. Neighborhoods with fewer parks, greenbelts and trees often become heat islands where the temperature is greater than surrounding areas. Heat and smoke limit the time children stay outside and make more people susceptible to asthma. The lack of air conditioning in Western Washington makes it more difficult for people, such as the elderly, who need relief the most.
The health problems resulting from climate change are compounded because they work in unison, complicating the response from health-care providers, said Ebi. She is concerned that the region's health-care facilities don't have the capacity to handle a surge of patients when climate-related health problems pile up and will be overwhelmed.
People with diabetes can be weakened by dehydration, as it inhibits the absorption of insulin. Dehydration also increases the likelihood of kidney harm or kidney stones, putting those with kidney disease at greater risk of weather-related harm.
Plants are producing more pollen because of increased levels of carbon monoxide in the air, prolonging allergy season. Increased carbon dioxide reduces nutrients in the plants we eat. Greenhouse gases chew away at the ozone, leading to an increased risk of skin cancer.
This summer tied the summer of 2016 as the hottest in the Northern Hemisphere since 1880, according to data the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) released Monday.
A June study Ebi co-authored in the journal Science Advances predicted that 725 people could die in Seattle during an extreme heat wave if global temperatures rise about 5.4 degrees Fahrenheit since the preindustrial era.
A report from the UW's Climate Impacts Group found that Washington state could have a 67% increase in "very hot days" -- usually at or above 90 degrees Fahrenheit -- if global temperatures rise by 2.7 degrees Fahrenheit.
A warmer Pacific Northwest will be a new, suitable habitat for mosquitoes, ticks and fleas carrying Lyme disease and West Nile virus, of which the first Western Washington case was recorded last year.
"Our warmer and longer summers are providing pretty enticing environments for mosquitoes and ticks," Ebi said.
In an effort to blunt the impact of heat and smoke this past summer, the city of Seattle installed new air-filtration systems at five public sites to give people without air conditioning a place to go if the heat rose and the sky was choked with smoke. During each of the summers of 2017 and 2018, Seattle had 24 days total of increased air pollution from wildfire smoke.
Knowing and tracking what diseases and problems are heading toward the northwest corner of the country is an important part of protecting and preparing people for climate change. Public-health officials say they need to set up systems to track climate-change-related health issues such as Lyme disease as it moves closer to our region. "We need to monitor when these things are showing up," said Heidi Roop, a research scientist at Climate Impacts Group.
Dealing with climate-related health issues is proving to be as difficult as reducing greenhouse-gas causing emissions. Public-health officials know more needs to be done to mitigate existing problems and prepare for what is to come. To do this, more funding is needed, Duchin said.
Duchin and his colleagues at Public Health -- Seattle & King County feel that scarcity acutely. Though they released a plan to address health issues related to climate change two years ago, there isn't a single employee solely dedicated to its implementation. Duchin said the plan is "largely aspirational."
The "blueprint" lays out six core functions and 15 strategies for Public Health to combat health problems caused by climate change. The core functions include creating policies around climate change, preparedness and educating agency leaders and employees.
But people shouldn't be waiting for an official response and need to educate themselves and agitate for their elected officials to do more, Roop, the Climate Impacts Group research scientist, said.
She added, "When we understand the implications of an issue on our daily lives and our communities, it is easier to see where and how we can act to motivate change."
___ (c)2019 The Register-Guard (Eugene, Ore.) Visit The Register-Guard (Eugene, Ore.) at www.registerguard.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.
Classification



End of Document


Seattle's Climate Pledge Arena makes first concert announcement with The Weeknd
Seattle Times (Washington)
February 3, 2021 Wednesday

 Copyright 2021 Seattle Times
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 314 words
Byline: Michael Rietmulder, The Seattle Times
Body




Feb. 3—Double The Weeknd, double the fun?
Washington fans of pop megastar The Weeknd were undoubtedly bummed when COVID bumped his Tacoma Dome date last summer. Those ticket holders will have to wait even longer to catch the Canadian crooner, but The Weeknd is now planning two return trips to the Puget Sound area.
Ahead of his Super Bowl halftime performance on Sunday, pop megastar The Weeknd announced a sprawling run of new shows and makeup dates for his After Hours tour, including the first concert announced at Seattle's Climate Pledge Arena.
The R&B/pop king will grace the yet-to-be-completed Climate Pledge Arena on March 4, 2022, midway through the North American leg of his long-awaited tour supporting the biggest album of his career. Tickets go on sale to the general public 10 a.m. Monday, Feb. 8 through Ticketmaster.
CPA officials (or whoever runs its Twitter account) made clear that this will not be the arena's first concert — an honor that seems destined for a certain local band — merely the first announcement. The arena is slated to open this fall when the Seattle Kraken will rip its first slap shots off the boards in the expansion team's inaugural NHL season.
Two months after the CPA gig, The Weeknd will return to Western Washington to close the North American leg at the Tacoma Dome on May 1, 2022. This is now the second time the singer's Dome show has been rescheduled amid pandemic-ravaged tour plans. Tickets for the original date(s) will be honored.
When The Weeknd finally makes his Puget Sound return, it should feel like a long-delayed victory lap two years after releasing the most successful album of his career. Last year's '80s synth spectacular "After Hours" was a critical and commercial smash bizarrely snubbed by the Grammys.
___ (c)2021 The Seattle Times Visit The Seattle Times at www.seattletimes.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.
Classification



End of Document


Seattle breaks 100-year-old record 'twice in two days' as climate crisis intensifies extreme weather
The Independent (United Kingdom)
June 28, 2021 Monday 11:34 PM GMT

 Copyright 2021 Independent Digital News and Media Limited All Rights Reserved
 
Section: CLIMATE; Version:23
Length: 874 words
Byline: Andrew Buncombe
Highlight: Just 44% of Seattle homes have air-conditioning compared to nationwide average of 91%
Body




As he starts up his leaf-blower, Ti Luu glances at his watch.
Another hour and he is to head home to try to find somewhere cool  before things really get hot.
The 35-year-old landscaper says: "I started work an hour earlier so that I could go home an hour earlier. In the meantime, I am just trying to stay cool - drinking lots of water and putting ice on my face.
"This is the hottest I've ever seen it in Seattle."
Mr Luu, who was working on the edge of city's Capitol Hill neighbourhood on Monday, was one of millions across the simmering, scorching Pacific Northwest, trying to stay cool amid record high temperatures. Often, such efforts were in vain.
From Portland, Oregon, up to northern Vancouver in Canada's British Columbia, residents were reeling from temperatures that in many cases were the hottest since records began. 
Moreover, it was not just a single 24-hour period of freakishly warm weather  but new entries were being made in the record books day after day. And the heat was not located in one place with its own particularly freakish microclimate but as television temperature maps showed, it was spread in even red bars of extreme heat across the region.
In Portland on Sunday, temperatures hit a record 112F (44.5C). In Seattle, it was 104F, surpassing a 2009 record of 103F. Monday was shaping up to be even hotter in both cities and would be the third consecutive day of temperatures above 100F. 
Indeed, just before 3pm it was reported Seattle had hit 106F, making it the hottest day on record, breaking Sunday's previous of 104F.
The reason ? People sitting outside Seattle's Macrina Bakery and Coffee Shop, were in little doubt.
Dean Sagafi, 25, a data analyst, says: "There have only been three days this hot in the last century, or something like that and now we're having three of those days in a single weekend?" He says he had tried to stay cool the night before by putting his bedsheets in the freezer and adds: "I am not a scientist but I would put at least some of this down to climate change."
Scientists are in agreement that the climate crisis, which devastated this part of the United States last year with deadly wildfires that struck communities that usually were spared, is leading to hotter, drier summers, more heatwaves and wildfires.
Cristie Ebi, a professor at the University of Washington who studies global warming and its effects on public health, is reported as saying this is a taste of what is to come.
Historically, few homes in Seattle  had air-conditioning, as most people reckoned it was not worth it just for the odd day in the 80s or 90s at the height of summer. Indeed, it was reported that Seattle has the fewest homes with air-conditioning - just 44 per cent - of any of the 15 largest US cities. 
Nationally, about 90 per cent of US homes have primary air-conditioning installed.
In Seattle, that is increasingly becoming the norm for newly built properties. 
Erin Frinucane, 31, sitting in the shade with her two dogs, says: "I just moved to Seattle from Portland two months ago. I did not think I would need air-conditioning. If I had it, I would not be sitting here."
In addition to sending alerts telling people to stay inside and keep hydrated, officials in larger cities have been opening cooling centres, many of them public libraries, for people to take respite. The Seattle Times reported  that on Saturday, at least 41 people had visited emergency departments in King County for heat-related illnesses. In the past three years, the highest number of such visitors was nine.
Lots of businesses in Seattle shut for the day, deciding it was too dangerous for their workers. 
Among them was Corrin Cruz, 29, a bar tender at an Asian restaurant. She was sitting outside a cafe, sipping a bottle of sparkling water. 
She said of her restaurant: "It's the first time they have had to close but it is already hot enough in the kitchens with those woks - especially wearing a mask."
Ms Cruz also says she believes the climate crisis is responsible. 
Yet, she says there is a certain hypocrisy among some residents in cities such as Portland. While some people made an effort to cycle or use public transport, many continue to drive large vehicles.
She adds: "Politicians could to more to push for change. They have the power."
Ms Cruz's apartment also did not have A/C, so over the weekend she spent $160 (£115) on a wall unit.
Many campaigners have pointed out that the climate crisis unfairly impacts the poor, particularly communities of colour, and will continue to do so. 
Even a short hot snap like this leaves some people less equipped to deal with it. Diet, access to healthcare and the presence of pre-existing conditions can all turn extreme weather in to a crisis 
Willy Tolliver, 71, a retired lecturer and basketball coach, was on his way to pick up his medicine from the clinic. 
He, too, believes the climate crisis is responsible. He says: "I've been here since 1968 and there's not been a day like this. We need to act quickly. Or else there won't be a world for us to see."
 Read More
Murder hornets: Scientists find dead insect in first 2021 sighting
Couple caught burying protected Joshua trees to build home
The Big Question: Why are some of the planet's coldest areas experiencing heatwaves?
Classification



End of Document


Climate report predicts Northwest lifestyle in peril
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
November 25, 2018 Sunday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2018 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: C; Pg. 009
Length: 987 words
Byline: Evan Bush Seattle Times
Body




Climate change's effects - among them, increasing wildfires, disease outbreak and drought - are taking a toll on the Northwest, and what's to come will threaten and transform our way of life from the salmon streams to ski slopes, according to a new federal climate assessment released Friday.
 The 1,000-plus-page report, produced by the U.S. Global Change Research Program, is the most comprehensive evaluation to date of climate change's effects on the nation's economy, human health, agriculture and environment. Thirteen federal agencies contributed to the report, which was required to be published by Congress.
 The federal report's stark, direct and largely negative projections are at odds with President Donald Trump's skeptical view of climate science. But federal officials, like National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration researcher David Easterling, left little room for ambiguity about whether climate change was real and who was causing it.
 Temperature data, Easterling said, provided "clear and compelling evidence that global average temperature is much higher and rising more rapidly than anything modern civilization has experienced and that this warming trend can only be explained by human activities ?"
 Sea-level rise and extreme events like heavy precipitation are continuing to increase, he said. Soon, if emissions aren't significantly reduced, ecosystems will transform and species will go extinct. By the end of the century, the report says, climate change could slash the country's economic production by as much as about 10 percent.
 Warming temperatures are expected to reshape the Pacific Northwest as winter precipitation increases overall, but with greater variability from year to year, according to a chapter of the federal report that detailed expected effects on the Northwest. That means we can expect both more drought and more extreme rain events.
 Temperatures in the Northwest have risen nearly two degrees since 1900, according to the assessment. The idea that climate change's effects are in the "far-off and distant future" is mistaken, said Heidi Roop, a research scientist with the University of Washington's Climate Impacts Group, which was involved in writing a chapter of the report. "We are observing increases in temperature in our region, and around the globe, now," she said.
 The report predicts that warming's effects will shake the Pacific Northwest's regional identity at its cultural core.
 If emissions are left unchecked, salmon are projected to lose about 22 percent of their habitat by late century due to warming stream waters, the report says. Revenue from skiing and other snow-based recreation could drop by more than 70 percent annually.
 Northwest crops are seeing negative effects already, according to the report. Higher spring temperatures are causing tree fruits to flower earlier, which creates pollination problems. Summer heat stress can sunburn apples and berries, causing damage in harvest and transport, according to the report.
 More water storage in reservoirs will be needed to deal with changing precipitation patterns (more rain, less snow) and increased irrigation demands for Northwest crops, the report says. Long term, temperature changes and severe heat could force premium wine-grape production away. Ocean acidification and harmful algal blooms "could lead to extensive fisheries closures, across all of the region's coastal fisheries," the report says.
 Nature's drama will rise, too, as landslides, wildfires and flooding increase in frequency and intensity. And our infrastructure, which is designed for the climate of the past, isn't ready, the report says. Saltwater could intrude into coastal groundwater supplies. More wildfires could cause more energy, transportation and water-quality problems.
 Pests, wildfire and extreme heat have taken a toll on health, according to the report.
 The Pacific Northwest recently saw more cases of Lyme disease, which correlates with higher temperatures and changing tick habitat, the report says. West Nile cases have risen along with temperatures. In Oregon, E. coli and salmonella infections climbed during high heat. Nighttime heat waves, dangerous here because people are not acclimated or adapted to hot weather, have been increasing over the past century.
 Earlier this year, wildfire smoke smothered Seattle in an unhealthy haze of floating particulate.
 "Not a single person in Washington state did not breathe bad air if you were around in August this year," Roop said. "We were breathing wildfire smoke from California, Siberia and British Columbia. This global issue is showing up in our backyard and touching lives."
 Air quality is likely to worsen, the report says, as fire seasons get longer because of dry forest conditions.
 Even with improvements in greenhouse-gas emissions, "airborne particulate levels from wildfires are projected to increase 160% by mid-century," according to the report. Rates of respiratory illnesses will likely follow that trend.
 Natural disasters and other climate stressors could also raise the risk of mental health problems, the report says, noting that Northwest states provide relatively little access to care for mental illness compared to other states.
 We may have already seen a glimpse of our future. In 2015, temperatures were about 3.4 degrees above normal and winter provided record-low snowpack in most places. Agriculture losses exceeded $633 million in Washington because of drought, according to the assessment. Some Northwest ski areas never opened. Harmful algae bloomed, and high levels of toxins closed salmon, shellfish and crab fisheries along the coast. Wildfires caused Seattle City Light to shut down power transmission lines originating in the North Cascades. Warm water temperatures caused widespread salmon die-offs in several streams.
 It was a difficult year, and one that "may be commonplace in the future," the report says.
Classification



End of Document


A sign of change at the Kraken's home: Climate Pledge Arena signage arrives
Seattle Times (Washington)
December 2, 2020 Wednesday

 Copyright 2020 Seattle Times
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: SPORTS
Length: 261 words
Byline: Geoff Baker, The Seattle Times
Body




Dec. 2—Months after Amazon bought the naming rights to change KeyArena to Climate Pledge Arena, the signage representing that switch arrived for installation Wednesday morning at the site of the under-renovation venue.
Signage has been a somewhat controversial topic at the arena, undergoing a nearly-$1 billion private-funded overhaul beneath its historically preserved roof. KeyBank had stopped paying for naming rights a decade ago, but the venue's "KeyArena" sign remained in place until last summer after city officials determined the cost of removing it was prohibitive.
Thus, the venue continued to be referred to colloquially as "KeyArena" — much to the consternation of the Oak View Group developer now in the process of doubling its square footage as well as the Seattle Kraken NHL expansion team preparing to play there starting late next year. Attempts to temporarily rename it "New Arena at Seattle Center" never really caught on and KeyArena thus stuck until the naming rights were sold and the private developer paid to have the old signage removed.
The new name is believed to be the first time a sporting venue has been dubbed for a social cause. Typically, a stadium or arena will simply assume the name of the corporation paying a new rights fee or purchasing another entity that already holds it — with local examples of both recently happening when Safeco Field was renamed T-Mobile Park and CenturyLink Field became LumenField.
___ (c)2020 The Seattle Times Visit The Seattle Times at www.seattletimes.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.
Classification


 
End of Document


DELETED: Microsoft, Brooks and 11 more companies join Amazon's Climate Pledge to be carbon-neutral by 2040
Seattle Times (Washington)
December 9, 2020 Wednesday

 Copyright 2020 Seattle Times
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS
Length: 8 words
Byline: Katherine Khashimova Long, The Seattle Times
Body




This story has been deleted by the news provider.
Classification



End of Document


El Nino may not be alone in changing world climate climate climate
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia) virginia)
October 19, 1997, Sunday sunday sunday

 Copyright 1997 Charleston Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P16A P16A P16A
Length: 760 words
Byline: Diedtra Henderson THE SEATTLE TIMES times times
Body




SEATTLE - Move over, El Nino. University of Washington researchers
think they've put their finger on another, equally significant climate
pattern that can reduce stream flows, erode snowpack and heat up ocean
temperatures along the coast.
The initials that have been spelling trouble for water managers and
salmon alike are PDO, short for Pacific decadal oscillation.
PDOs are climate shifts that march in decades-long time frames,
driving the intensity or weakness of Aleutian low-pressure systems.  systems.  systems.
When that winter low-pressure system is strong, Alaska salmon do well.
When that winter low is weakened, it is West Coast salmon that do
well.
UW scientists, in a paper submitted for publication in the journal
Nature, suggest that PDO-driven ocean conditions in the northeast
Pacific have a stronger tie to salmon survival and climatic conditions
in the Northwest than previously credited.  The paper ties Alaska's
"spectacularly high" production of Pacific salmon, including pinks and
sockeye, to the climate regime of the past 20 years. A shift in the
regime is also to blame for Alaskan salmon being at "alarmingly low"
levels 20 years ago while Columbia River chinook and Oregon coho were
strong. The next decade looks pretty bleak for West Coast salmon
already at risk for extinction - and that's independent of this year's
blockbuster El Nino and despite millions invested in hatcheries to
increase salmon smolt numbers.
"The present phase should be expected to reverse within a decade, at
which time favorable ocean conditions should return for West Coast
salmon," concludes an abstract of the paper, written by UW scientists
Steven Hare, Nathan Mantua and Robert Francis. "Until that time,
however, the current status of many of the threatened and endangered
stocks may not substantially improve."
The researchers looked at 65 years of salmon-catch data in an area
from California to Alaska for pink, sockeye, chinook, coho and chum
salmon and ran meteorological records from the past century looking
for patterns of climate change. Since 1977, the region has been in a
"positive" PDO phase, producing warm and dry winters for the Pacific
Northwest with less snowpack and lower water levels. The southern part
of North America and northern Mexico have had cool and wet winters,
while southeast Alaska has seen warm, wet winters.
Warm coastal ocean temperatures, meanwhile, stretch from California to
the Gulf of Alaska.
It is changes in those Pacific Ocean temperatures that lead to effects
on the climate across North America, researchers say. Much as the
warming of tropical Pacific waters fuels El Nino, the PDO exerts its
influence on climate by affecting wave patterns in the atmosphere.
Does that mean money is being wasted on salmon restoration for fish
headed to hostile ocean waters?
"Some of these things are really important - habitat restoration,
changes in the regulations - all these things matter," said Mantua, a
research scientist in the Department of Atmospheric Sciences. "The
message we're trying to convey is, 'Just because you build a hatchery
and release millions of smolt does not guarantee you're going to have
a strong influence on returns.'"
Bruce Crawford, assistant director of fish management for the state
Department of Fish and Wildlife, and others agree the ocean has a
strong influence on salmon survival. But they contend that money used
to reduce salmon mortality caused by Columbia River dams and to
address the impacts of urban sprawl and damaging agricultural and
forest practices has been money well spent.
"We need to be careful we don't sweep all salmon problems into the
ocean," added Dave Seiler, a fish-research scientist with Fish and
Wildlife. "That's my only point in this discussion, that we don't lose
the connection we have on land with fish production."
The fly in the PDO ointment is last year's data. Bristol Bay, a
typically productive area in Alaska, saw its worst salmon returns in
decades.
At a recent session to discuss the Bristol Bay mystery, Hare, a
biologist with the International Pacific Halibut Commission, said the
jury's still out on whether last year signaled a switch from a warm to
a cool PDO phase.
If there were a shift, Hare said, you'd expect a somewhat weakened
Aleutian low and slightly colder winters. That did occur, he said,
"but there should have been less precipitation and lower sea-surface
temperatures, which was not the case."
"It's not nearly clear enough and coherent enough to say something has
happened," Mantua said. "You really have to look back in time. That's
the whole difference in this thing." thing." thing."
Classification



End of Document


Bezos Earth Fund gives nearly $800 million to climate groups in first round of grants
Seattle Times (Washington)
November 16, 2020 Monday

 Copyright 2020 Seattle Times
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS
Length: 856 words
Byline: Katherine Khashimova Long, The Seattle Times
Body




Nov. 16—In its first round of grants, the $10 billion Bezos Earth Fund will award $791 million to 16 environmental organizations largely focused on researching and implementing ways to reduce carbon emissions, build green jobs and restore wildlife.
The funding round announced Monday was remarkably large for an organization that does not have a website and has not published a list of staff, named a director or released instructions on how to apply for grants.
Five big-name environmental nonprofits — the Nature Conservancy, Natural Resources Defense Council, Environmental Defense Fund, World Resources Institute and World Wildlife Fund — each received $100 million. Those grants will fund projects that track and mitigate the effects of climate change, including by protecting and restoring mangroves, developing satellite fleets to monitor carbon dioxide and methane emissions and electrifying U.S. school buses.
Other recipients included pass-through organizations that make grants to smaller nonprofits working against climate change, including by mobilizing voters. The ClimateWorks Foundation, which funds groups looking for ways to cut down on carbon dioxide, received $50 million. The Climate and Clean Energy Equity Fund, the Solutions Project and the Hive Fund for Climate and Gender Justice, which are focused on ameliorating the effects of climate change in minority communities, each received $43 million.
A third group of recipients is pushing for scientific and technological advancement in the fight against climate change, largely in ways that would promote job growth in the so-called "green economy."
The Salk Institute for Biological Studies received $30 million to advance research into the ability of plants like corn and soybeans to capture and store carbon. The same sum went to the Energy Foundation to support advocacy related to hybrid and electric vehicles, zero-emission buildings and renewable energy. The Union of Concerned Scientists received $15 million to advocate for electric trucking and updates to the U.S. electrical grid. The Rocky Mountain Institute's campaign for carbon-free buildings was awarded $8 million; an additional $2 million went to the Institute's startup lab. Dream Corps Green For All, which received $10 million, develops communication campaigns it says helps turn climate change into a nonpartisan issue, making it easier for policymakers to advocate for legislation promoting green jobs.
The Eden Reforestation Project, which restores ecosystems in developing countries, received $5 million. The NDN Collective, a Native-led group that received $12 million, has not said how it will use the funding.
The grant-making process appeared to be driven almost entirely by Bezos himself. "I've spent the past several months learning from a group of incredibly smart people who've made it their life's work to fight climate change and its impact on communities around the world," Bezos wrote in an Instagram post. "I'm inspired by what they're doing, and excited to help them scale."
One potential complication for Earth Fund recipients is the lack of transparency surrounding how the massive pot of cash is administered. If an Earth Fund grant amounts to a personal check from the leader of one of the largest companies in the world — and one that relies heavily on the polluting transportation sector — that may pose problems for climate groups, including those like the Environmental Defense Fund, which says it does not accept donations from corporations in some sectors, including warehousing and logistics fulfillment.
"The Bezos Earth Fund is not a corporation," said Amy Morse, an Environmental Defense Fund spokesperson. "It is a private philanthropy and a separate entity from Amazon."
On the other hand, if Bezos's involvement is more limited, that raises questions about just who is setting grant-making priorities. So far, the fund has not made any hiring announcements.
Bezos does not seem overly entangled in the fund's day-to-day administration. After an initial conversation with Bezos, "most of the communications [sic] was with his staff," said Laurie Marden, the chief development officer of the Union of Concerned Scientists, in an email. "In fact, direct donor interaction was quite limited for a gift of this size" — $15 million, the largest her organization has ever received.
Part of that grant will fund advocacy around electrified trucking. Climate experts have said Amazon will likely need to electrify its shipping fleet if it is to make good on its promise last year to be carbon neutral by 2040.
Bezos unveiled the Earth Fund in February amid sharp internal and external criticism that the company was contributing to climate change. In 2018, Amazon was likely one of the world's top carbon dioxide emitters, on par with oil and gas companies, The New York Times reported. The e-commerce giant has since taken some steps it says will lessen its carbon footprint, including ordering 100,000 electric delivery vans and investing in carbon offsets.
___ (c)2020 The Seattle Times Visit The Seattle Times at www.seattletimes.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.
Classification



End of Document


Climate can't wait for feds, say Clinton, Gore, Nickels
Seattle Times (Washington)
November 2, 2007 Friday

 Copyright 2007 Seattle Times
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 977 words
Byline: Warren Cornwall, Seattle Times
Body




Nov. 2--Seattle on Thursday briefly took center stage in the campaign against global warming, basking under a spotlight cast by Nobel laureate Al Gore, former President Bill Clinton, and 110 of the nation's mayors.
At a time when climate change has garnered new levels of public attention in the U.S., most recently with Gore's Nobel Peace Prize for his work on the issue, the United States Conference of Mayors launched its climate summit here.
The two-day gathering at the Edgewater Hotel, along Seattle's downtown waterfront, was part old-fashioned religious revival, part wonky policy talk.
Mayors exhorted one another to do what the federal government hasn't by promising to cut greenhouse gases in line with targets from the international Kyoto treaty. They swapped notes on how to boost transit service and pay for solar power projects.
And they applauded one another as leaders in the trenches, grappling with the practical challenges of cutting greenhouse gases in their communities.
"We've created 700 laboratories across the country where we are trying to find answers to this global problem," Seattle Mayor Greg Nickels told the audience, referring to the more than 700 mayors who have promised that their cities will comply with Kyoto.
That pledge, championed by Nickels, earned the mayor repeated praise from fellow mayors and former Vice President Gore.
Miami Mayor Manuel "Manny" Diaz likened Nickels to Chief Seattle, the local Native American leader oft-quoted by environmentalists and the city's namesake.
"Your leadership has been nothing short of exceptional," Diaz said.
Gore, speaking via satellite from Nashville, told the mayors they were providing needed political leadership in the U.S. at a time when the threat of climate change requires swift action. The recent findings that the polar ice cap this year had melted more than in any other year on record underscores that urgency, he said.
"This is the alarm bell," Gore said. "It's time to act."
Beyond local efforts, there should be a ban on new coal-fired power plants unless they are equipped to catch and store carbon once that technology is available, he said.
"Coal is in many ways the biggest part of the problem. ... We've got more than enough to completely incinerate the planet," Gore said. And a new, more comprehensive international treaty should be negotiated by 2009, rather than the scheduled 2012, he also said.
Clinton, at an afternoon talk in a crowded room at Benaroya Hall, told the mayors they needed to help show developing countries such as China and India that tackling climate change isn't tantamount to taking economic castor oil.
"They [developing countries] won't do it anywhere unless we can prove that we don't have to become poorer for it," Clinton said. "This is an opportunity. It's not a burden."
To help spur the movement, Clinton announced a new program between his private Clinton Foundation and the mayors' conference, to make energy-efficient products more affordable for 1,100 U.S. cities by helping them buy as groups and get volume discounts.
His Clinton Climate Initiative has already started a similar project with 40 of the world's largest cities and several major banks that help finance projects to increase energy efficiency.
Clinton said energy efficiency programs represent some of the easiest ways to reduce greenhouse gases by conserving energy in inefficient buildings and other infrastructure.
A new emphasis on such "clean" technology is also a key to tapping into new industries with growth potential that could reverse a decline in real wages in the U.S., Clinton told the audience, which greeted his talk with enthusiastic applause.
Mayors attended from cities as large as Miami and as small as Northglenn, Colo., with politicians from 29 states in all. Mayors registered from 22 Washington cities.
The mayors were met at Benaroya Hall by a small gathering of demonstrators urging people to vote against the regional road and transit tax increase on the ballot, arguing it could exacerbate climate change by increasing traffic. The demonstrators included small children dressed in polar-bear outfits, a reference to polar bears threatened by the loss of ice to warming in the Arctic.
The event drew also media attention from as far away as New York City and Japan.
A team from Japan's public television company, the Japan Broadcasting Corp., was there for part of a weeklong examination of Seattle and its environmental projects.
Reporter Tomoo Sono said it was partly intended as a contrast to the image many Japanese have of the United States and climate change, one shaped primarily by the Bush Administration and its unwillingness to join the Kyoto treaty.
While speakers repeatedly insisted that tackling climate change was a bipartisan issue, Thursday's events had a markedly Democratic hue. In addition to Gore and Clinton, speakers included Nickels; Washington Gov. Christine Gregoire; Mayors Conference President Doug Palmer, the Democratic mayor of Trenton, N.J.; as well as Diaz, an independent.
One former Republican is expected to take the stage today. New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg, who left the party and declared himself an independent, is scheduled to address the mayors.
After that, the U.S. House Select Committee on Energy Independence and Global Warming will hold a field hearing chaired by Rep. Jay Inslee, D-Bainbridge Island, to take testimony from the mayors.
Warren Cornwall: 206-464-2311 or wcornwall@seattletimes.com
To see more of The Seattle Times, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.seattletimes.com. Copyright (c) 2007, Seattle Times Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.
Classification



End of Document


Climate scientists surer than ever: Man's to blame
Seattle Times (Washington)
February 2, 2007 Friday

 Copyright 2007 Seattle Times
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 915 words
Byline: Sandi Doughton, Seattle Times
Body




Feb. 2--The distinction between "likely" and "very likely" might seem slight to most people, but to climate scientists, it's huge.
In 2001, an international panel charged with reviewing all the evidence for and against global warming said emissions from power plants, cars and industries were likely contributing to rising temperatures around the world.
Today in Paris, the influential group went further, declaring it very likely that human activity is to blame.
"This says we are 90 percent sure the bulk of global warming is caused by [man-made] greenhouse gases," said Thomas Ackerman, director of the University of Washington's Joint Institute for the Study of the Atmosphere and Oceans. "We'll leave a little wiggle room because we're scientists and that's the way we think, but 90 percent is about as good as it gets."
Eleven of the hottest years on record have occurred in the past 12 years, and the convergence of melting glaciers, vanishing permafrost and rising sea levels cannot be explained by natural climate variation, according to a draft of the report that concludes: "Warming of the climate system is unequivocal."
The draft says the future holds parched conditions for Africa, much of South and Central America and the American Southwest, while winter rains will intensify, replacing snow across more northern latitudes -- including the Pacific Northwest. Cold snaps will become rare and stronger rainstorms more common.
The new report is the fourth from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, established in 1988 by the United Nations and the World Meteorological Organization. As the most forceful consensus yet on the perils of global warming, it could sway governments and industries. And it comes at a time when the issue is receiving unprecedented attention in the United States.
Though his administration has so far opposed emission limits, President Bush acknowledged "the serious challenge of global climate change" in his State of the Union address. Congress convened hearings this week and is considering several bills to cap emissions. Hollywood has taken notice, with two Oscar nominations for former Vice President Al Gore's movie, "An Inconvenient Truth."
States and cities, including Seattle, are enacting their own measures to scale back carbon dioxide, the primary heat-trapping gas. And last week, the leaders of 10 major corporations, including General Electric and oil giant BP America, called for mandatory emission limits.
Based on more than five years of additional data and study, the new report warns that even if emissions level off, warming and sea-level rise will continue for centuries. The world is already experiencing droughts, drenching rains, tidal surges, heat waves and more intense hurricanes that "more likely than not" are the result of global warming, the draft says.
Scientists say complex computer models have accurately predicted most of the climate change so far, increasing their confidence in future projections. They've also been able to tease out evidence of global warming on smaller scales than ever before, showing that every continent except Antarctica has heated up.
Carbon-dioxide levels in the atmosphere are higher than any time in the past 650,000 years, according to studies of ice cores, and average global temperatures have increased about 1.3 degrees F since the dawn of the industrial age. Sea level rose nearly 7 inches during the 20th century, and the rate of rise has more than doubled in the past decade.
But based on a new understanding of the way the oceans expand as they absorb heat, the report is expected to scale back earlier predictions that sea level could rise nearly 3 feet by the end of this century, flooding islands and coastal areas. The most probable sea-level rise remains the same, about 16 inches, but the worst-case estimate is now just under 2 feet.
Some scientists are pushing for a rewrite of that section of the report, arguing that it doesn't take into account the recent collapse of a major ice shelf in Antarctica and the accelerating loss of ice from Greenland.
The planet could well get hot enough to melt the Greenland ice sheet, raising water levels by 23 feet, but the change will occur very gradually, over a thousand years or more, the draft says.
The draft predicts temperature increases of 2 to 11 degrees by the end of the century, depending on the level of greenhouse emissions. The scientists say the most likely temperature increase will be between 3 and 7 degrees -- more than enough to seriously disrupt global weather patterns and ocean circulation.
For the first time, the report also points out that as oceans absorb carbon dioxide, they are becoming more acidic. A team of Seattle-based scientists reported in 2004 that the change imperils the tiny shellfish that are vital to the marine food chain.
Though additional warming is now inevitable, if emissions were significantly scaled back and alternative energy sources phased in soon, the outlook could improve within 30 to 50 years, said Chris Bretherton, director of the UW Program on Climate Change.
Sandi Doughton: 206-464-2491 or sdoughton@seattletimes.com
Information
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change: www.ipcc.ch
Copyright (c) 2007, Seattle Times Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.
Classification



End of Document


Seattle Times Danny Westneat column: Climate change stirs much heat
Seattle Times (Washington)
December 13, 2009 Sunday

 Copyright 2009 Seattle Times
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 968 words
Byline: Danny Westneat, Seattle Times
Body




Dec. 13--Admit it's a sham, some readers say. No, we're killing the planet, others insist.
I get asked or challenged about global warming more than any other issue. But in six years as a columnist I've never written about it.
I guess you could call me a global-warming agnostic. A climate shrugger.
I defer to the lion's share of scientists who say temperatures are rising faster than is historically normal. And that greenhouse gases emitted by us are in all likelihood a major part of the cause.
But I find many of the doomsday scenarios more political than scientific. It wouldn't surprise me if the current predictions about global warming turn out to be wildly off.
I'm also leery of how shrill and defensive some climate-change scientists have become. They act more like lobbyists than scientists.
I used to work in science (first in biology, then chemistry). I never once ran into this we're-right-you're-wrong tribalism that you see from scientists in those e-mails hacked from a British climate-research center last month.
Now politicians from Gov. Chris Gregoire to President Obama are convening in Copenhagen for climate-treaty talks this week. Polls show Americans don't believe in it so much anymore. So what are we to make of global warming and its underlying science?
I don't know. So I asked Dennis Lettenmaier.
He's not so easy to pigeonhole. Though people sure keep trying.
On some sites on the Internet, the renowned University of Washington hydrologist is dubbed a global-warming denier. A few years ago Republicans who ran the U.S. Senate's Environment and Public Works Committee put out a news release hailing his work for having "debunked many of the dubious claims made by the global warming alarmists."
"That turned me into a hero for a time on Fox News," Lettenmaier says.
This same Lettenmaier, though, co-authored what was called a seminal article in the journal Science last year, arguing that man-made global warming is so altering patterns of precipitation and water flow that our centuries-old scheme for managing water resources needs to be chucked.
For that he has been hailed as a hero at climate-change conferences.
"These are crazy times in this field," he said from his UW office last week.
On the recent "Climategate" scandal, in which private e-mails show some leading scientists calling critics idiots and appearing to jigger data to get cleaner, pro-global-warming results, Lettenmaier, who knows some of the people involved, says he found it "very troubling."
"Global warming somewhere along the way became part of the liberal agenda, and that infected some scientists," he said. "It has been oversold a bit -- this idea that everyone's in agreement and there's some unified view. It's not true. There's a lot of uncertainty about what's going to happen in the future."
The data that the earth is warming at unusual rates is solid and obvious, he says. That humans are contributing to it via greenhouse-gas emissions is also well established.
"Where there's tremendous uncertainty is how it's going to play out in the future," he said.
His paper that got picked up by Fox News, for example, used soil-moisture measurements to show that droughts have become milder -- contradicting some climate-change models. What Fox News missed, though, is the part that showed droughts were more severe in pockets in the Western U.S.
Both sides cite that paper to make their political points, he notes. It's also only one of more than 200 peer-reviewed articles he's published.
He said there's a disturbing tendency among some scientists to dismiss "pieces of this story that don't quite fit" -- such as the drought research, or other work showing floods haven't increased as predicted, either.
"Some people over on the climate-change side don't really want to hear that," he said.
Not wanting to hear is not science. It's ideology.
On the flip side, Lettenmaier gets his news mostly from KIRO radio (he doesn't have a TV). That station has some hosts who regularly denounce global warming as a scam or a conspiracy cooked up by left-leaning scientists. He says the willful ignorance there and with some members of Congress is astounding.
There are about 100 faculty members at the University of Washington doing climate-related research, on everything from clouds to polar ice to the effects of ocean acidification on oysters. Most publish their data online. If they are all faking it, all on message, that's some sophisticated conspiracy. And that's at just one university.
There's something about this issue -- its complexity? its implications? -- that makes it like a Rorschach test. A lot of people simply see whatever they'd prefer to be true.
Lettenmaier says the recent e-mail scandal has been damaging to the image of science, which may have political fallout. But it hasn't changed a thing about the current scientific understanding of global warming.
"It's happening," he said. "Where it's going to lead is uncertain. But I think it's untenable to pretend we can keep pumping this stuff into the atmosphere at current rates and it's not going to make any difference."
There you go -- one moderate view from the middle of this storm.
Maybe it helps cut through the fog a bit.
But as the scientists should have done from the start, I'll leave it there for you to make of it what you will.
Danny Westneat's column appears Wednesday and Sunday. Reach him at 206-464-2086 or dwestneat@seattletimes.com
To see more of The Seattle Times, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.seattletimes.com. Copyright (c) 2009, Seattle Times Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.
Classification



End of Document


Climate researchers seek citizen scientists
Seattle Times (Washington)
March 11, 2009 Wednesday

 Copyright 2009 Seattle Times
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 1282 words
Byline: Sandi Doughton, Seattle Times
Body




Mar. 11--Valerie Hilt's yard brims with hollyhocks, hellebores and hyacinths. But it's her lilac bush that landed the Port Angeles great-grandmother in the annals of science.
For 35 springs, Hilt has logged the date when the first leaf unfurls on the 20-foot-tall shrub. She also takes note of the first fragrant blossom and other milestones, like peak bloom.
"It doesn't take any great amount of time," she said. "I'm always outside looking around anyway."
Hilt, 70, is one of the last remaining lilac watchers in a network that once included 2,500 volunteers across the Western U.S. Their handwritten postcards grew into a powerful database that researchers have used to document how rising temperatures are hastening the onset of spring.
Now, a national program is hoping to recruit a new corps of 100,000 citizen scientists to monitor climate impacts on the living world. This time, volunteers can gather data on a wide range of plant species, from dandelions to Douglas fir. Next year, the network will expand to include birds, bugs and other animals.
"It's really measuring the pulse of the natural system and how it's responding to climate change," said Daniel Cayan, a climate researcher at Scripps Institution of Oceanography who analyzed the lilac data.
"You don't have to be a scientist to make these kinds of observations ... and it's amazing what can emerge from them."
Participants in the National Phenology Network will enter observations online, and the data will be freely available.
Earlier springs noted
Phenology is the study of life-cycle timing, from bird migrations and tadpole metamorphosis to the explosion of wildflowers in mountain meadows. Researchers are discovering that even tiny changes in temperature can disrupt that timing, pushing some species toward extinction and favoring others.
"Temperature governs every single biological reaction," said Lisa Crozier, a research ecologist at the Northwest Fisheries Science Center in Seattle.
Warmer temperatures allowed a tawny brown butterfly called the sachem skipper to expand into Eastern Washington in the 1990s, Crozier found. But sockeye salmon in the Columbia River, which are now returning from the ocean nearly 11 days earlier on average than in the 1940s, may suffer from having less time to feed before spawning, she said.
Dozens of studies concur that the onset of spring -- as measured by the response of plants, animals and ecosystems -- is about a week earlier than it was 50 years ago. A difference of a few degrees or days may seem inconsequential, but timing is everything for species like the pied flycatchers that migrate between Africa and the Netherlands.
The birds used to arrive in Europe and nest in time for their chicks to take advantage of a seasonal caterpillar explosion. But the caterpillars now peak 16 days earlier. As a result, chicks are starving and some flycatcher populations have plummeted 90 percent.
"These mismatches in timing could be happening all over," said Jake Weltzin of the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), executive director of the Tucson, Ariz.,-based phenology network. But many changes are going unnoticed, because so few people have been looking in a systematic way, he added.
The best historical data on plants and animals is from Europe. Vineyard records in France's Burgundy region reach back to the 1300s -- and show a one- to two-week quickening in the grapes' life cycle. Monks across the continent kept meticulous crop diaries that span centuries. And in England, armies of amateur naturalists still document nightingale songs, cuckooflower buds and other natural harbingers, as their ancestors did for generations.
By comparison, historical records of plants and animals are rare in the United States. What exists -- like the lilac data and annual bird counts -- corroborates warming's impacts. The phenology network is shaking the bushes for file cards and notebooks that may be sitting in someone's basement or gathering dust on a museum shelf.
"Maybe there are people in Seattle who have been tracking skunk cabbage, or farmers keeping track of when they harvest wheat," Weltzin said. "We want to rescue those data sets."
West is warming quickly
Climatologist Greg Jones at Southern Oregon University recently discovered data from the 1850s recorded by Oregon's first winemaker, Peter Britt. "It's almost like being a detective," said Jones. "You have to find the keeper of the information."
The University of Washington's Burke Museum has boxes bursting with 12,000 index cards, each the record of a bird nest monitored by students and volunteers. A collection of eggs, some dating back to the 1800s, provides another window into the region's biological past. But few researchers have tapped the treasure trove, largely because the museum hasn't been able to digitize the data.
Historical records from Western North America are particularly valuable, said USGS climate scientist Julio Betancourt, who helped launch the phenology network. "The West is warming up faster than anywhere else in the country, and faster than most places in the world," he said.
Scientists believe natural climate cycles are playing a role, but man-made greenhouse warming also is a major factor.
UW aquatic ecologist Daniel Schindler has tracked the impact on Lake Washington, where records go back 50 years. The lake's spring cycle of warming and algae growth now start three weeks earlier than it used to. That's bad news for water fleas that miss out on food because the timing of their hatch is now often out of sync with the algae bloom. The water fleas help keep the lake clear by consuming algae and also serve as food for fish, Schindler said.
With thousands of volunteers coast-to-coast making similar observations when the phenology network is in full swing, it will be possible to expand beyond a regional focus to look at the country as a whole, Weltzin said.
The work could have practical benefits, such as development of pollen forecasts to alert allergy sufferers when cottonwoods are about to let loose, he said. Better understanding of the life cycles of noxious weeds could help in control efforts. And a study still under way finds that when lilacs bloom early, it's a sign that a bad fire season is ahead.
Some of Hilt's bulbs came up earlier than usual this spring, but so far the lilac is still hunkered down. Despite the occasional cool year, she's convinced her corner of the world is getting warmer.
"Our winters are not what they used to be," said Hilt, who has always been attuned to the changing seasons. Being a lilac-watcher has sharpened her eye for detail, she said, urging others to follow in her footsteps.
"It's quite interesting and watching for that first leaf or first bud gives you something to look forward to."
Sandi Doughton: 206-464-2491 or sdoughton@seattletimes.com
How to volunteer
USA National Phenology Network: The network recruits citizens, government agencies, nonprofit groups, educators and students to monitor the impacts of climate change on plants and animals in the U.S. For more information or to volunteer: www.usanpn.org
Project BudBurst: Project BudBurst, associated with the phenology network, also gathers plant observations, but doesn't require as much record-keeping. For more information: www.windows.ucar.edu/citizen_science/budburst
To see more of The Seattle Times, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.seattletimes.com. Copyright (c) 2009, Seattle Times Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.
Classification



End of Document


Teaching stewardship for warming planet; Course on confronting climate-change denial popular among students
The Toronto Star
March 16, 2018 Friday

 Copyright 2018 Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Section: LIFE; Pg. E12
Length: 975 words
Byline: Katherine Long The Seattle Times
Body




When she first started learning about climate change from one of her elders, Fawn Sharp was invited on a helicopter flight over the Olympic Mountains to survey the Mount Anderson glacier.
But the glacier was gone, melted away by the warming climate.
Sharp, who is now finishing her fourth term as president of the Quinault Indian Nation, remembers a deep sense of loss when she discovered the glacier had vanished.
It's the same feeling of despair that haunts the tribe over the demise of historic sockeye runs and the need to relocate the village of Taholah because of ocean encroachment, increasingly severe storm surges and flooding, Sharp said.
Loss is a growing issue for people working and living on the front lines of climate change. And that gave Jennifer Wren Atkinson, a full-time lecturer in the University of Washington Bothell's School of Interdisciplinary Arts Sciences, an idea for a class.
This quarter she taught students about the emotional burdens of environmental study. She drew on the experiences of Indigenous tribes, scientists and activists and asked her 24 students to face the reality that there is no easy fix - that "this is such an intractable problem that they're going to be dealing with it for the rest of their lives."
The class was so popular that she had to turn many students away. Atkinson plans to teach it again next year.
U.S. President Donald Trump has often referred to climate change as a hoax and his administration has taken steps to dismantle environmental regulations and pull out of the Paris climate agreement.
"We haven't had to spend any time debating whether climate change is actually happening," Atkinson said.
"It's more, 'What's my personal responsibility for this, and how do I develop the personal resources to navigate it?'"
For university students in their teens and 20s, the loss some feel due to climate change can be deeply personal - akin to grieving for a dead parent or grandparent.
For Rhissa Delfin, global climate change hits home. Delfin was born in tourist-dependent Guam, where parts of the island's spectacular coral reefs have periodically died back in a process known as coral bleaching, caused by warmer ocean waters. In a warmer world, islands such as Guam will also be threatened by more powerful, more dangerous tropical storms.
Delfin, whose family lives in the mainland of the U.S. now but who has gone back to visit periodically, says she worries the island's natural flora and its clear ocean waters will be lost in a changing climate, an idea that sometimes brings her to tears.
"I don't want the only memories I have of home to be on home videos and pictures," Delfin said.
Lauren Morrison, one of Atkinson's students, grew up in Lubbock, Texas, where many consider climate change a hoax. Then she moved to Washington and took a class at Bellevue College that changed her mind. In short order, she went from thinking scientists were making it up to believing the scope of the problem was overwhelming.
Morrison cheerfully takes on the idea that the class is a bit "snowflakey," but she sees value in learning how to find a new way to talk about climate change - neither a dry, scientific approach nor an overly emotional reaction, but something in between.
"Not coddling, but more empowering," she said.
She's majoring in environmental studies and hopes to work in environmental policy after she graduates.
Atkinson became interested in the subject in fall 2016, when she joined a group of educators and activists around the region who convened to talk about teaching climate change. The group gathered shortly after the U.S. election and "they talked openly of grief and fear," and the possibility that years of their work would be undone, she said.
That meeting prompted Atkinson to embrace the emotional side of the issue. Within the university classroom, there's a tendency to treat a student breaking down in tears "as a detour in the conversation, something we need to patch up or steer around so we can get back to the 'real work,'" Atkinson said. "That led me to wonder, what if instead of treating those moments as a diversion, we took them as our starting point?"
She expected the students who signed up for her class to be majoring in environmental work, looking for a way to steel themselves for the realities of their job.
To her surprise, about half the students are majoring in other disciplines. Many feel a sense of panic and urgency in their own lives, but they have no one to talk to about it.
Student Cody Dillon used to be a climate-science skeptic. Then he did his own reading and research and changed his mind.
Dillon isn't going into environmental work - he's a computer-science major. Yet the potential for a planet-wide environmental catastrophe seemed so real to him five years ago that he quit his job and became a full-time volunteer for an environmental group that worked on restoration projects.
Six months into the work, he decided that wasn't the right response, either. "I didn't really feel like I had an impact," he said.
Atkinson's class was just what he was looking for - a place where he could discuss his concerns about a changing climate, and also learn more about what's being done in response.
"You really see the amount of passion and drive a lot of these activists are putting in," he said.
Atkinson said she hopes the class helped her students steel themselves to the amount of loss that will happen over their lifetimes and gave them resources to help cope with despair and grief.
"We are already transforming the planet - so many species and communities are going to be lost, displaced or massively impacted," she said. "The future isn't going to be what they imagined."
Morrison said she felt empowered by learning about climate-change actions around the globe.
"It's easy to feel defeated, but all over the world, people are stepping up," she said.
Classification



End of Document


Inslee proposes his latest climate-change package as part of Washington budget
Seattle Times (Washington)
December 15, 2020 Tuesday

 Copyright 2020 Seattle Times
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: NATIONAL POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 475 words
Byline: Joseph O'Sullivan, The Seattle Times
Body




Dec. 15—OLYMPIA — Gov. Jay Inslee Tuesday unveiled a new climate-change package that includes a renewed push for a clean-fuels standard and capping some greenhouse-gas emissions.
Other proposals would further electrify Washington's ferry fleet and reduce the carbon footprint of buildings, and, according to Inslee, bring equity into environmental policy.
Inslee's proposal comes as part of his proposed two-year budget, and as lawmakers prepare to convene in January for the 2021 legislative session.
Lawmakers and Inslee must also reckon with tax-revenue shortfalls due to the pandemic and ensuing restrictions as they write a new two-year operating budget.
But Inslee — who has focused much of his time in office, as well as his unsuccessful bid for president, on climate change — has vowed to keep pushing the issue forward.
One of the largest pieces of the proposal is a low-carbon fuel standard for transportation fuel, which Inslee has pushed hard for in recent years. That legislation aims to reduce the carbon content in transportation fuels in the coming years.
While House Democrats passed a version of the low-carbon fuels legislation in 2019 and 2020, the proposal stalled in the Democratic-controlled Senate. There, a handful of Democrats have opposed it — and with few changes in this year's legislative elections, that dynamic may be no different.
This year's proposal calls for a 10% reduction in the amount of carbon in fuels by 2028, and a 20% reduction by 2035.
Opponents to such legislation have pointed to the potential price tag for consumers. One projection by the California Air Resources Board put that state's added cost for gas at between 18.3 and 45.8 cents per gallon to get a 20% reduction in carbon intensity.
But supporters of low-carbon fuels say the move is necessary to reduce greenhouse gases. And in last year's debate, they noted the average retail price of gasoline in California last year was lower than it was nine years ago, when that's state's low-carbon standard began to take effect.
Inslee's plan also seeks to establish a cap on carbon emissions for the state's largest emitting industries.
And it would invest $318 million over four years to fund the second conversion of a state ferry to electric, and would construction a new hybrid electric ferry.
Among other things, the proposal devotes more funding to making sure new buildings use clean energy for heating, and to retrofit older buildings to make them more efficient.
And the governor proposes a new climate-related investment account in the budget. Spending from that account would undergo analysis to make sure those funds are use to eliminate environmental harm, as well as health and economic disparities, for vulnerable communities.
___ (c)2020 The Seattle Times Visit The Seattle Times at www.seattletimes.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.
Classification



End of Document


Inslee's climate plan aims to ban new gas-powered cars by 2030
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
May 4, 2019 Saturday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2019 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: C; Pg. 002
Length: 880 words
Byline: Jim Brunner and Hal Bernton The Seattle Times
Body




SEATTLE - Washington Gov. Jay Inslee on Friday released his presidential campaign's ambitious blueprint for combating climate change, including a 2030 ban on the sale of new cars, light trucks and buses powered by gasoline, diesel or natural gas.
 The plan relies heavily on federal regulatory action to swiftly transition the U.S. away from fossil fuels in the transportation, electricity and building sectors. It calls for a phaseout of coal-fired power plants by 2030, with zero-emission energy by 2035, and new construction standards to eliminate carbon pollution from new commercial and residential buildings.
 As the 2020 election season unfolds, Democrats are eager to draw a stark contrast with the policies of President Donald Trump, who has disparaged the science behind climate change, sought to unravel Obama-era policies to reduce carbon emissions and announced his intention to withdraw the U.S. from the Paris agreement that seeks to limit the overall global temperature increase to less than 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit by the century's end.
 Inslee said his plan is meant to match the scale and pace of action scientists have warned is required to avoid the most catastrophic impacts of global warming.
 "It brings scientific reality because it's based on that scientific reality that we have to build a clean-energy future to save ourselves and our kids," Inslee said in an phone interview Thursday from California. "We are a can-do country. We need a can-do president and a can-do plan."
 The announcement also seeks to garner attention for Inslee's struggling presidential campaign, promoting an aggressive national climate agenda he said is based on proven successes in his own state, including a recently passed 100% clean-energy law.
 "We can take what we have done in Washington and make it a template for the nation," he said.
 Inslee  formally announced his proposals Friday morning in downtown Los Angeles, joined by Mayor Eric Garcetti.
 Scientists have tagged carbon and other greenhouse gas emissions from fossil fuels as the major driver of climate change. Inslee's proposal seeks to commit the U.S. to achieving net-zero emissions by 2045 - five years before the midcentury target in a $5 trillion climate plan released earlier this week by Beto O'Rourke, the former Texas congressman also running for president.
 Inslee's eight-page plan notably makes no mention of what once was a central part of his climate agenda in Washington - charging a tax or otherwise putting a price on fossil-fuel pollution. Inslee spent years pushing for such measures, but was rebuffed repeatedly by the Legislature, and state voters rejected two carbon-pricing initiatives.
 His shift away from carbon pricing comes as some other Democratic presidential candidates have embraced the idea, including Sen. Cory Booker, D-N.J., and former Housing and Urban Development Secretary Julián Castro. Some oil companies, including Royal Dutch Shell and ExxonMobil, also have supported some form of carbon tax.
 Since his official entry into the race on March 1, Inslee has run his long-shot campaign as a climate hawk, saying he'd make fighting global warming the No. 1 focus of the nation if elected. That message so far has not elevated Inslee in the polls, as national- and state-level polling show him consistently near the bottom of what has grown into a 21-candidate Democratic field.
 Inslee's national agenda would seek to go beyond what the governor has accomplished in his own state, even with substantial Democratic majorities in the Legislature.
 The governor notched significant wins in the recently ended legislative session, including a clean-power bill phasing fossils fuels out of electricity generation by 2045 and new building and appliance standards.
 Lawmakers also approved an Inslee-backed bill to phase out the use of hydrofluorocarbons, a "super pollutant" chemical used in aerosols and refrigeration, as well as a package of incentives, tax exemptions and funding designed to encourage the use of electric vehicles.
 He is expected to sign some of those measures into law Tuesday in Seattle.
 But Inslee also had setbacks, including defeat of a clean-fuels standard intended to lower greenhouse-gas emissions from car and truck tailpipes.
 Similar standards are in effect in California and Oregon. Inslee, in his new plan, proposes taking the idea national to help reduce carbon emissions from older vehicles that would still be on the road in 2030, even if his proposed ban on new fossil-fuel vehicles were to take effect.
 But the Washington state bill faced strong opposition from oil companies and other industry groups, and failed to clear the Senate. State Rep. Joe Fitzgibbon, D-Burien, who sponsored that proposal, said, "I don't think we made meaningful progress reducing greenhouse gases" related to transportation.
 The failure of that proposal leaves Washington short of reaching greenhouse-gas reduction targets set in state law by 2035, according to the Inslee administration's own projections.
 Inslee also failed to gain passage of another part of his state climate-change agenda, a bill that would have tied Washington to California's motor-vehicle standards intended to increase the availability of a wide-range of electric cars and other zero-emission vehicles.
Classification



End of Document


Climate change, beetle may doom rugged pine
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
November 13, 2011, Sunday

 Copyright 2011 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P12A
Length: 1255 words
Byline: Craig Welch, The Seattle Times
Body




SAWTOOTH RIDGE, Wash. - The bug lady scoots through stick-straight lodgepole and ponderosa, and marches uphill toward the gnarled trunk of a troubled species: the whitebark pine.
The ghostly conifers found on chilly, wind-swept peaks like this may well be among the earliest victims of a warming climate. Even in the Northwest, rising temperatures at higher elevations have brought hundreds of thousands of whitebark pines in contact with a deadly predator - the mountain pine beetle - that is helping drive this odd tree toward extinction.
Connie Mehmel, with the Okanogan-Wenatchee National Forest, is one of a handful of entomologists struggling to track the beetles' destructive path.
Mountain pine beetles are probably best-known here as the trunk-girdling devils that have reddened and deadened millions of acres of lodgepole, exposing the Northwest to a greater potential for cataclysmic wildfires. But the evolutionary history of lodgepole pine and beetles is so intertwined that those forests in many places are expected to grow back.
Whitebark pines may not.
"What concerns me and a lot of people in my line of work is we are seeing beetles being more active in areas where we didn't use to see them - particularly in higher-elevation areas," Mehmel said. "We have thousands of acres of whitebark pine that are being attacked by mountain pine beetles, more than we've seen in quite a long time."
Much attention has been paid to the way pine beetles have gnawed through whitebark forests in the Northern Rockies, particularly in Yellowstone National Park, where the trees' seed cones provide important food for grizzly bears.
But the beetles also are whittling away at whitebark in Northwest areas once thought safe from bugs.
When it comes to the number of acres or trees killed by beetles and an invasive fungus called white pine blister rust, hard data typically requires aerial surveys and is frustratingly inexact. Researchers instead focus on trend lines.
And in the Northwest, they all point in one direction. A study in the mid-2000s showed whitebark trees had declined by 41 percent in the Western Cascades. Tree declines throughout Washington and Oregon hovered around 35 percent. In the coastal range and the Olympics, blister rust infection ranged from 4 to 49 percent. Nearly 80 percent of the whitebark in Mount Rainier National Park are infected. Whitebark deaths in North Cascades National Park doubled in the last five years.
"We know the incidence of blister rust infection and mountain pine beetle outbreaks is increasing exponentially," says biologist Amy Nicholas. She authored a report for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service this summer that concluded whitebark pine across the West belongs on the Endangered Species List. The agency declined to list the tree, saying it didn't have the money.
"When you look at the big picture, the studies all say the same thing," Nicholas says.
At Sawtooth Ridge, amid snow flurries a few thousand feet above the Methow River, Mehmel raps on a whitebark trunk with her knuckle. She pulls out a hatchet, chops off some bark, and eyes the wood through what looks like a jeweler's glass.
Knotty, silvery whitebark pines are stubby, crooked, deformed by blustery winds and rarely top 80 feet. They're found where other vegetation is sparse - on granite shelves or bald knobs or in patches of scraggly brush. In the North Cascades, that's usually above 5,500 feet.
Unlike trees whose seeds are spread by wind, whitebark pine needs a bird, the Clark's nutcracker, which opens the trees' massive cones with its beak, then hides the contents for later meals. A single bird can store 98,000 seeds a season. Many cached seeds are dug up by black bears, squirrels, chipmunks and other birds. But what remains produces a new generation of trees, which may live 500 years or more.
In a region that relies on mountain snows for its water, whitebark pines help hold moisture until late spring. Snow piles up around their trunks, and the trees' shade then slows snowmelt, reducing flooding.
"It's a really special tree, a beautiful tree, a very dramatic-looking tree, surviving in steep areas in the midst of rock and lichen," said entomologist Karen Ripley, with the Department of Natural Resources.
Mehmel, too, appreciates the tree, but also appreciates its enemy.
"Aha! There you are!" she finally said, and uses tweezers to remove a black beetle the size of a match head.
"They're stout little buggers," she said. But "they have a cuteness to them."
That cuteness belies the havoc they wreak. When female pine beetles land in a host, they release pheromones that attract thousands more bugs, which mate and tunnel into the tree. The young later eat tree tissue used to transport water and nutrients. Then the tree dies.
Beetles are an essential part of lodgepole or ponderosa forests, killing off weak or older stands, which then burn. Fire helps release seeds for the forest to regrow. During warm periods, the beetles reproduce faster, which can spur epidemic attacks like the unprecedented one currently under way across the West.
But in whitebark pine, beetle epidemics historically have been rare because the trees appear in places too cold for bugs to do much damage - until lately.
In 2007, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service reported, beetles killed whitebark pine trees across half a million acres in the West - the most, at the time, since record-keeping began. Two years later, beetles killed trees on 800,000 acres. And unlike lodgepole, whitebark pines produce few seed cones and do so late in life. They aren't set up to survive massive slaughter.
"They're used to more gradual, patchy disturbance, like a small lightning strike that burns a portion of an acre," Ripley says.
Just on Sawtooth Ridge, one of the hardest-hit areas in the region, Mehmel's rough estimates suggest several hundred thousand whitebark pines have died since 2004. Others believe those estimates are too high, but don't dispute the trend.
"Twenty years ago you wouldn't have seen something like this," Mehmel says. "Conditions would not have supported it."
For many species, it's too soon to fully grasp the effects of climate change. For whitebark pine, most signs are troubling.
Blister rust, a fungus brought from overseas a century ago, is epidemic. The fungus doesn't always kill, and pockets of trees in Southern Oregon and near Sunrise in Mount Rainier seem resistant. Research on transplanting those strains has been encouraging.
But even mild infections can drive off Clark's nutcrackers, making it impossible for trees to reproduce. And weak trees are more susceptible to beetles.
"There's just a deadly synergy between beetles, blister rust and climate change," said Jesse Logan, a whitebark expert in Montana.
Still, whitebark is a survivor. While some creatures may migrate in response to a changing climate, whitebark pine has been doing so through the ages. It has moved ever higher on the landscape to avoid competition with other trees. But that option may not be available for long.
"It's evolutionary-ecological habit of escape has been to move to places where other trees can't make a living," said Logan. "But the pace of change is unprecedented. And it has nowhere else to go."
Connie Mehmel, an entomologist with the Okanogan-Wenatchee National Forest, inspects a dying whitebark pine in high terrain above the Methow Valley, where mountain pine beetle infestations are now common.
RIGHT: "They're kind of cute," Mehmel says of mountain pine beetles, but deadly for stands of whitebark pine.
MCT photos
Classification



End of Document


Citizen butterfly catchers; Volunteers are increasingly helping scientists in projects such as studying climate change
Times Colonist (Victoria, British Columbia)
August 11, 2017 Friday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2017 Times Colonist All Rights Reserved
Section: LIFE; Pg. C2
Length: 814 words
Byline: Evan Bush, The Seattle Times
Dateline: MOUNT RAINIER NATIONAL PARK, Washington 
Body




At the pace of a wedding march, a group of six hikers saunters down the Sunrise Rim Trail on a recent Wednesday morning. Over their left shoulders, Mount Rainier's Emmons Glacier wilts against a sapphire backdrop.
Suddenly, Tucker Grigsby, an intern with the National Park Service, lurches forward and bounds down the trail. With a snap of the wrist worthy of Roger Federer, he flicks a net through the air and captures his floating prize - a magnificent orange and black banded butterfly.
As soon as the specimen is secure, the hikers crowd around Grigsby, who holds up a ventilated bug jar. "Can you guys tell me which one this is?" Grigsby says. Each takes a turn handling the jar.
The group studies the markings on the butterfly and determines it to be an Edith's Checkerspot - one of five species captured that day.
No, these hikers are not collectors (no pins needed; it's catch and release). Most of them are not scientists.
They're volunteers with the Cascades Butterfly Project, learning to gather data that will help measure the impact of climate change on these important pollinators and Mount Rainier National Park itself.
Today, they're learning to walk a "transect" of about a kilometre and capture any butterflies that flutter into an imaginary fivemetre box in front of them. They also catalog plant varieties.
Volunteers will gather data each week this summer at 10 sites in the Cascades.
Scientists can probe the data for patterns and compare plants'growth with the emergence of the fluttering pollinators, said Regina Rochefort, science adviser at North Cascades National Park. The big question: As the climate changes, "Are plants responding at the same rate as the butterflies?" The question mirrors what scientists worldwide are asking of any number of environmental features: How will nature adapt to a world growing warmer? To collect the expansive data sets needed to explore climate change's thorny questions, scientists are increasingly turning to unpaid volunteers. Washington state - with a bevy of hikers, climbers and skiers exploring the natural world - makes for fertile recruiting ground.
Many point to 1900 as citizen science's birth. At the time, sportsmen commonly hunted nongame birds on Christmas Day. Concerned about conservation, New Jersey ornithologist Frank Chapman proposed counting birds instead of shooting them and the Christmas Bird Count was born. Now, data from 116 years of the Audubon Society-sponsored activity is available on the society's website.
But Julia Parrish, a University of Washington biology professor, said the concept of citizen science is as old as humanity.
"Every culture ... pays attention to natural phenomena, and we refer to that as an almanac," said Parrish. "I need to know when the birds are going to be here. I need to know when the salmon are returning - that kept people alive and that is the real start of citizen science."
Once a target of skepticism among researchers, citizen science is now so popular, it has its own association, a conference dedicated to its development and a number of websites that host data or match people with projects.
The Oxford English Dictionary in 2014 added "citizen science" to its volumes, defining the practice as "scientific work undertaken by members of the general public, often in collaboration with or under the direction of professional scientists and scientific institutions."
"There was some concern that citizen science wouldn't be good enough to publish in journals, but that has been dispelled," said Martin Storksdieck, an Oregon State University professor studying the topic, who noted that passionate volunteers are no less reliable than undergraduates making minimum wage.
Popularity has grown "in terms of the number of projects out there, the diversity of projects out there, the disciplines, and the people engaging with it," he said.
Many disciplines are leaning on volunteers. Some crowdsource analysis in cases where human brains still exceed computer algorithms. University of Washington researchers, for example, developed a puzzle game called Foldit, in which people manipulate, or "fold" digital protein structures. The patterns people find can sometimes be applied to fight deadly diseases.
Other projects focus on a specific problem, like testing the water quality of a local stream.
Climate study is a natural fit for citizen science, Storksdieck said.
"Where someone has to observe something ... you need people on the ground," he said. "Citizen science is ideal for that."
As scientists learn to trust participants in collecting data, the hope is that participants will gain trust in science.
"We're not trying to trick them into learning science," said Darlene Cavalier, who founded SciStarter, a citizenscience project database.
"They're so valuable for what they're going to be able to contribute to scientific research. ... It's a great additional outcome."
 Graphic



 
Photos By Ellen M. Banner, Seattle Times; Tucker Grigsby, an intern with the Cascades Butterfly Project, jumps to catch a butterfly.; Photos By Ellen M. Banner, Seattle Times;  Anne Hersh looks at a chart so she can record the butterfly Richard Scranton, right, is holding in a container.; 
Classification



End of Document


UW climate scientist warms to work on food supply
Seattle Times (Washington)
December 8, 2009 Tuesday

 Copyright 2009 Seattle Times
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 1144 words
Byline: Sandi Doughton, Seattle Times
Body




Dec. 8--The bureaucratic brawl over greenhouse gases continues today in Copenhagen -- and University of Washington climate scientist David Battisti is glad he's not there.
Battisti's research on the fundamental workings of ocean and atmosphere helped refine the understanding of global warming's regional impacts. But what happens at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Denmark is mostly politics, not science, he says. And anyway, his interests have changed.
These days, Battisti is just as likely to be meeting with Mexican wheat breeders as puzzling over prehistoric storm-track dynamics. He's collaborating on a seed bank for Indian farmers whose crops are threatened by rising temperatures. He joined forces with economists to predict what global warming will mean for rice fields in southern China.
"It's refreshing to do work that people care about," Battisti said. "Most people find my basic research really boring."
Battisti, 53, is not the only climate researcher shifting some of his efforts from pure theory to the real world. Many young scientists are more keen to explore the impacts of climate and climate change than the basics of atmospheric circulation, said John M. Wallace, a pioneer of the UW's climate programs.
"We have seen a lot of movement in that direction ... and I would include myself," said Wallace, who has turned his attention to the problem of snowpack in a warming world.
As he's done throughout his career, Battisti caught the wave early.
It started eight years ago with an appeal for help from a group of agricultural economists at Stanford University struggling to forecast rice harvests in Indonesia. They knew El Nino was key but needed a climate expert to figure out how the system worked.
Battisti fit the bill. His early analysis of why El Nino patterns shift was a breakthrough, Wallace said. In a field where a scientific paper is considered influential if it's referenced by 30 other studies, several of Battisti's publications have garnered more than 100 citations.
And the plain-spoken New York native can explain science without making people's eyes glaze over.
"David is a good storyteller," said doctoral student Robert Nicholas, who was lured to Seattle by Battisti's energy and enthusiasm.
Tall and thin, Battisti sports an Errol Flynn mustache and a halo of curls that might encounter a comb on special occasions. He talks fast and thinks faster.
"He throws out ideas left and right," Nicholas said. "When I get out of a meeting with him, I have to go through a blitz of note-writing so I can remember everything we talked about."
It's not uncommon for colleagues to receive e-mails from Battisti at 2 a.m. During the day, it's tough to catch him in his office. He's more likely hunched over a stack of papers in one of several coffee shops, where he consumes an average of eight "espresso units" a day.
"I don't think he ever sleeps," said Walter Falcon, Stanford professor of international agricultural policy.
Climate curiosity
Battisti never had applied his climate skills to agriculture, but he was primed to care about farmers in the developing world. As a boy, he spent his weekends and summers milking cows and baling hay on his grandparents' dairy.
He quickly immersed himself in the minutiae of rice cultivation, international markets and Indonesian culture. "There's almost nothing that doesn't interest him," Falcon said.
The collaboration yielded a model based on ocean temperatures that the Indonesian government uses to forecast harvests and plan supplementary rice purchases. Battisti and Nicholas pulled together a similar model for a wheat-growing region in northern Mexico.
Battisti said it's great to see his work actually helping others. But he admits his main motivation is still curiosity about what makes climate tick.
"I like problems that make you rethink how the world works."
In Mexico, for example, he and Nicholas turned conventional wisdom on its head when they discovered rainfall in winter, not summer, was the key to filling reservoirs and ensuring good wheat harvests.
Climate change looms large in agriculture, and Battisti and his colleagues soon began asking themselves what the future might hold.
In Indonesia, they found unchecked warming could halve rice harvests in some areas within 50 years. On a global scale, they calculated that average growing-season temperatures around much of the world likely will be higher than ever before in recorded history by 2100. Crops such as corn, rice and wheat grow faster when it's hot, but produce less grain. So yields could drop 20 to 40 percent.
Battisti now is convinced that global warming's threat to the food supply is far more pressing than the melting glaciers and rising sea levels that grab most of the headlines.
He's always careful, though, to separate science from policy.
"I don't have any special place to say what, if anything, should be done," he said. "But I do have a special role to make sure the science is not misrepresented."
Initially a skeptic
Few would accuse Battisti of being part of what some climate skeptics call Al Gore's zombie army. Battisti originally was skeptical himself that global warming would be a serious problem, and his research helped undermine two of the most calamitous global-warming scenarios: that disruption of the Gulf Stream "conveyor belt" might plunge Europe into a deep freeze, and that climate might flip abruptly.
He wasn't among the climate scientists whose hacked e-mails have led to accusations of data manipulation and fraud. But in typical fashion, Battisti deconstructed the most damning messages for students in his introductory course to global warming. His conclusion: The arrogance revealed in some messages is troubling, but there's no indication of scientific fraud and nothing that negates the evidence for global warming.
Basic climate science remains Battisti's bread and butter, accounting for 90 percent of his research funding. But he spends nearly as much time working on agriculture projects, paid for by a patchwork of private foundation money and small federal grants.
The future of agriculture will be barely a blip on the agenda at Copenhagen. A group of 60 of the world's top agricultural experts pointed out the oversight last month in a statement calling for more work to preserve and develop crops that will thrive in a hotter, drier world.
The signatories included a single climate scientist.
Guess who?
Sandi Doughton: 206-464-2491 or sdoughton@seattletimes.com
To see more of The Seattle Times, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.seattletimes.com. Copyright (c) 2009, Seattle Times Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.
Classification



End of Document


How one number touched off big climate-change fight at UW
Seattle Times (Washington)
March 15, 2007 Thursday

 Copyright 2007 Seattle Times
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 1266 words
Byline: Warren Cornwall, Seattle Times
Body




Mar. 15--The number is eye-popping, and it was repeated so often it became gospel.
The snowpack in the Cascades, it was said, shrank by 50 percent in the last half-century. It's been presented as glaring evidence of the cost exacted by global warming -- the drying up of a vital water source.
That statistic has been repeated in a government report, on environmental-advocacy Web sites and in media coverage. Seattle Mayor Greg Nickels recently mentioned it in a guest column in The Seattle Times.
Here's the problem: The number is dead wrong.
The debunking of this statistic, and the question of just how much the state's snowpack shrank, is stirring up a heated debate among the region's climate scientists.
On Monday, it escalated further when University of Washington researcher and State Climatologist Philip Mote stripped a colleague of his title as associate state climatologist, triggering concerns that scientific dissent is being quashed. Losing the title doesn't affect the man's employment at the UW.
The affair might be dismissed as a tempest in an ivory-tower teapot. But it comes at a time when the science of climate change is getting more attention from policy-makers and the public.
It illustrates the challenge of teasing apart how global climate change affects a small region like the Northwest. It shows how a single statistic can take on a life of its own in this politically charged debate, batted around from politicians' speeches to newspapers (including information from a Seattle official in a May 2006 story in The Seattle Times).
And it reflects the pressures and scrutiny surrounding politicians' use of science as global warming gains more attention. Recently, some scientists have been criticizing claims in the Oscar-winning climate-change documentary "An Inconvenient Truth," which stars Al Gore.
Shrinking, sure, but ...
The debate in Seattle started with Mark Albright, a part-time UW meteorologist and, until this week, the associate state climatologist.
After reading Nickels' February essay in The Times, Albright sent an e-mail to colleagues saying he didn't see evidence that snowpack was steadily shrinking, much less by 50 percent.
A back-and-forth ensued, involving Albright, co-worker and meteorologist Cliff Mass, and several scientists with the UW's Climate Impacts Group, a federally funded team of researchers that plays a prominent role analyzing climate change in the Northwest.
All quickly agreed that the 50 percent number was wrong. It may have originally come from an editing error in a 2004 report issued by an Oregon panel of scientists.
"No one believes in this 50 percent number anymore," Mass said.
The mistake doesn't discredit projections that the state's snowpack will shrink in the future due to climate change, Mass and Mote agree. But Mass said it underscores the uncertainty around predicting what will happen. And it leaves people like Nickels vulnerable to attack from people questioning the importance of climate change.
"To allow him [Nickels] to be out there with numbers that are unsupportable, it's setting him up to walk the plank," Mass said.
Todd Myers, a critic of Nickels' global-warming strategy and director of the local free-market policy group the Center for Environmental Policy, said this shows the danger of science getting distorted for political goals.
"If you have people who are campaigners in one direction or the other, you're going to get data out there that's used incorrectly," Myers said.
Which is it?
So what is the right number?
That's where things have gotten testy.
On one side, Mass, who is working with Albright, said they see only a small downward trend in Cascade Mountain snowpacks, perhaps 10 to 15 percent since the 1940s. The measurement can be exaggerated by starting during a time of high snowfall, in 1950, and ending at a time of low snowfall in the mid-1990s, Mass said. But snowfall has increased again in recent years, and there is little overall change in snowpack in the past 30 years, Mass said.
Mass stressed that he is not one of the small number of scientists disputing that humans are causing the planet to heat up.
Albright, in an e-mail, said the evidence doesn't support claims of a dramatically shrinking snowpack. But he didn't answer questions on his disagreements with Mote.
Mote, meanwhile, questioned the methods Albright and Mass are using to analyze data, mostly gathered from weather stations in the mountains that track snowfall. Mote, a member of the Climate Impacts Group who rose to prominence partly due to his work documenting shrinking snowpack around the West, said the decline is more like 35 percent.
In late February, professor Dennis Hartmann, chair of the UW Atmospheric Sciences Department, stepped in to referee. After a meeting with the researchers, Hartmann issued a statement saying that snowpack appears to have dropped 30 percent, and that warming in the future will likely affect snowpack, particularly at lower elevations.
"Gag-order approach"?
Since then, the debate has gotten more heated.
Mote, upset that Albright was broadly distributing e-mails about the issue, last week told Albright that he would have to let Mote preview any e-mails before sending them out, if he was tying his work to the state climatologist's office.
Mote's position as the state climatologist is a volunteer job that doesn't carry any official recognition or rules. Mote agreed to do the job several years ago, and his colleagues accepted it. The office collects and disseminates climate information and advises the state on climate-related issues.
When Albright refused Mote's ultimatum, Mote barred him from associating himself with the state climatologist's office.
Mote said Albright was sending out messages showing just his side of the story, and airing an analysis that hadn't gone through proper quality checks. As a representative of the climatologist's office, there needed to be standards, he said.
"I'm not trying to squelch debate by any means," Mote said.
But Mass said Albright was doing nothing wrong -- simply airing his analysis and seeking feedback as he researched further.
"In all my years of doing science, I've never seen this sort of gag-order approach to doing science," he said.
Meanwhile, Nickels' office has switched to using the 30 percent figure announced by Hartmann, the department chair.
"Obviously we're going to use whatever number the scientists at UW say is accurate," Nickels spokesman Marty McOmber said.
Warren Cornwall: 206-464-2311 or wcornwall@seattletimes.com
Heated debate over global warming
University of Washington scientists are in a tense dispute over what has happened to snowpack in the Cascade Mountains, considered a critical potential effect of global warming.
The arguments and who's behind them:
50 percent decrease since 1950: Widely used as recently as this year, now dismissed by scientists on all sides as a major overstatement.
35 percent decrease since the mid-1940s: Offered by Washington State Climatologist and UW climate scientist Philip Mote.
30 percent decrease since 1945: Professor Dennis Hartmann, chair of the Atmospheric Sciences Department, after a meeting with the different sides and consultations with other scientists.
10 to 15 percent decrease since the mid-1940s: Professor Cliff Mass, in association with meteorologist Mark Albright
Copyright (c) 2007, Seattle Times Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.
Classification



End of Document


UW conference will address the ethics of climate change
Seattle Times (Washington)
April 29, 2007 Sunday

 Copyright 2007 Seattle Times
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 1064 words
Byline: Janet I. Tu, Seattle Times
Body




Apr. 29--For environmental engineer Sharon Wilson of Seattle, confronting climate change is about leaving the planet in good shape for future generations.
For activist-scholar Paul Baer, a University of Washington professor, limiting global warming won't happen unless a worldwide system is established that's fair to rich and poor countries alike.
For climate modeler Gavin Schmidt, a key concern is making sure the science of climate change is communicated clearly and accurately to people.
For them, as for many others -- experts and laypeople alike -- the central question raised by global warming is no longer whether it's real. For some of them, a major focus now is the ethical and moral aspects of global warming -- issues that raise questions for individuals, institutions and entire nations.
Climate Challenge
We're asking readers to join a monthlong challenge to reduce their individual greenhouse gas emissions.
Live Q&A Wednesday -- The ethics of climate change
Professor Stephen Gardiner of the University of Washington, an expert in environmental ethics, will answer questions and discuss the ethical implications of climate change Wednesday at noon. Ask now!
Sign up for our newsletter and we'll keep you posted about expert Q&As, tips and quizzes.
*
Tips to reduce your emissions.
Some of those issues will be explored at an Ethics of Climate Change conference Thursday and Friday at the University of Washington, where topics will range from the role of scientists to how to create a fair worldwide system for limiting greenhouse-gas pollution to why people and countries fail to act.
"A fair number of people, political leaders, have said this is one of, and perhaps the most, important international issue facing the planet right now," said conference organizer Stephen Gardiner, a UW associate professor of philosophy. "But we haven't really risen to the challenge yet of understanding how to deal with this particular global issue. ... My own view is if we're going to deal with this problem, we're going to have to deal with ethical questions."
The conference brings together philosophy professors, political scientists and scientists to discuss different dimensions of the debate. The keynote addresses are open to the public.
Moral responsibility
For Wilson, a Seattle resident who is not affiliated with the conference but plans to attend, taking care of the Earth is a moral responsibility.
"I believe all of Earth is a gift of God and a manifestation of God," said the environmental engineer. "I'm particularly concerned with species that aren't able to keep up with the changes. I'm concerned about increased storms and threats to food and water supplies. It's like: 'How dare we do this to the Earth?' "
Wilson has car pooled to work for 20 years and has installed energy-saving compact fluorescent light bulbs in her home. She chairs an environmental group at St. Andrew's Episcopal Church in the Green Lake neighborhood. The group is planning a showing of the Al Gore documentary, "An Inconvenient Truth," and doing an energy audit to determine how the church can be more energy-efficient.
Increasingly, other faith groups are also seeing the issue in moral terms and participating in events such as the recent Step It Up environmental rally and an upcoming local Interfaith Creation Festival.
While Wilson knows just a few groups making changes aren't going to make a big difference, "without those little changes, you don't make any big change," she said.
Communicating science
Schmidt, a climate modeler at NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York, believes scientists have a responsibility for the work they do "and its life once it leaves your hands."
"There is an ethical responsibility to make sure your science is communicated correctly" -- translated into terms regular folks understand, so it's less likely to be misunderstood or slanted to suit an agenda, said Schmidt, who is speaking at the conference on the ethics and role of climate scientists.
He and several other scientists started a blog -- www.realclimate.org -- to try to do just that. On the blog, the scientists offer their assessment of developments related to climate change. The intent, Schmidt said, is not to get involved in political debates but to "elevate the level at which the science is talked about."
The impetus for Schmidt was the 2004 movie, "The Day After Tomorrow," a big action film in which climate change causes a new Ice Age.
"People were asking lots of interesting things about it," Schmidt said, but with a few exceptions, "mostly scientists said, 'This is rubbish,' then ignored it. There was no forum for these issues to be discussed."
Fair enough
Baer, research director for EcoEquity, a nonprofit environmental think tank based in Albany, Calif., puts the moral dilemma he's most concerned with this way: Industrialized countries, in the course of their development, have already produced far more greenhouse gases per capita than poor countries likely would be allowed to produce in the future.
So these poorer countries "can't do what we did" to develop, says Baer, who is speaking at the conference. "But they can reasonably say: 'You did it. Why can we not do it?' "
EcoEquity is proposing something he calls "greenhouse development rights," a system that calculates how much each country should have to pay to help reduce greenhouse gases worldwide. The calculation is based in part on how much, per capita, each country polluted in the past and how rich it is. Essentially, richer countries and countries that have polluted more in the past would pay more.
EcoEquity is working with larger groups such as Christian Aid to push for adoption of this system.
"Fairness is an unavoidable issue. You can't force people not to pollute," Baer said. So if you don't want people to pollute, "you have to offer something that's fair enough. It doesn't have to be perfectly fair. But it has to be enough so they feel they aren't being screwed."
Information online
Registration is closed for the conference, but Thursday's keynote addresses are open to the public: Conference Web site
Copyright (c) 2007, Seattle Times Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.
Classification



End of Document


CORRECTION: Puget Sound area emerging as wine region, thanks to warmer climate
Seattle Times (Washington)
October 12, 2009 Monday

 Copyright 2009 Seattle Times
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 1325 words
Byline: Craig Welch, Seattle Times
Body




CORRECTION: This story published Oct. 12, 2009 and corrected Oct. 12, 2009 incorrectly identified scientist Dan Cayan's institution. He is a scientist with the Scripps Institution of Oceanography at the University of California, San Diego.
Oct. 12--SEQUIM -- Tom Miller rolls his metal stool down the row inch by inch, his long, leathery fingers pushing through the vines to clip grapes off by the bunch.
It's an early autumn morning at the top of the Olympic Peninsula, and Miller is doing something climate scientists believe would have been difficult, if not impossible, 50 years ago: harvesting grapes to make wine that people actually want to buy.
No matter whether they realize it, researchers say, Miller and a small explosion of new Western Washington wine-grape growers appear to be capitalizing on small climate shifts that are reshaping the global wine-growing map.
As climate changes threaten to wreak havoc on some of the world's most-famous wine regions -- France's Burgundy, Australia, parts of California -- experts say the cool-climate Puget Sound region might shape up to be one of the few beneficiaries.
"In the 1970s, the Willamette Valley (in Oregon) was at the cool-climate fringe for wine; it was one of the coolest places you could go and reliably ripen the fruit," said Gregory V. Jones, a climate scientist and wine expert at Southern Oregon University. But as temperatures warm in northern latitudes, "today Puget Sound is becoming that place."
Certainly technology and a growing thirst for boutique wines have helped drive where and how grapes are grown. But experts say it's increasingly possible to track the subtle ways climate change is altering landscapes by looking to vineyards around the globe.
Hotter ripening periods over the past 30 years have increased the alcohol content of rieslings in Germany's Rhine River Valley. In Napa and Sonoma, Calif., earlier springs and fewer frosts have helped boost wine quality. Australian vineyards have extended droughts, and other European growers are facing never-before-seen bug infestations. Vineyards are even cropping up in places -- such as southern England -- where they haven't been seen since before the Little Ice Age and the reign of Henry the VIII five centuries ago.
And some, like Miller's Dungeness Bay Vineyard, now are appearing where they haven't been seen at all.
Many varieties
Using clippers and wearing gloves so they don't accidentally snip off their fingertips, Miller and a group of friends fill a half-dozen plastic buckets full of a white-wine grape called siegerrebe. It's just one of several varieties that spill from tight, neat rows in his backyard.
Miller and his wife bought their Sequim property in 1995, and Miller -- a veterinarian and horticulturist -- had been using the ground to grow kale and oats to feed sheep. After stopping to visit one of the Puget Sound's first vineyards at the Bainbridge Island Winery in 2000, he thought: Why not? He had grown wine grapes before and knew enough to experiment.
"I couldn't think of a good reason not to try it," Miller said in his Scottish brogue.
He is hardly alone. Just a mile down the hill, another neighbor has started a vineyard, and a former stone carver from Italy has planted several thousand vines outside Port Angeles. In fact, while Western Washington, like Vancouver Island, has had a handful of wineries since the 1970s, the real growth has come only in the past decade.
"In 2000, I could count the number of people growing wine grapes in Western Washington on two hands," said Gary Moulton, a horticulturist with Washington State University's research and extension center in Mount Vernon. "Now there are about 75 growing grapes commercially and another 40 or so amateurs."
The scale remains quite small given Western Washington's vastness, but like the entrepreneurs who rolled into Oregon decades ago with dreams of producing the next great red, Western Washington's newest winegrowers are pioneers.
It's unlikely even this boom could have been possible half a century ago. Unlike the Yakima or Okanogan valleys, Western Washington doesn't get or stay hot enough to produce Cabernets or good table grapes. But growing seasons between the last spring frost and the first fall freeze have lengthened up and down the West Coast since the 1950s, making it increasingly possible to consistently grow cool-weather crops, including grapes like siegerrebe, Madeleine Angevine and pinot noir.
California concern
The same pattern of early bud-breaks and bloom that's sparking a Washington revolution also is creating unease to the south.
"The best flavor in a grape arrives at a particular moment -- when it ripens, but just barely," said Chris Howell with Cain Vineyard in California's Napa Valley. "You don't want them hanging out there too long and never getting ripe. But you also don't want them to get ripe" too soon.
Top vineyards are so susceptible to minute changes in weather that even slight climate variations can make the difference between a lackluster and high-quality grape. While heat can alter the balance of sugar and acid that gives wine flavor, some of that can be adjusted by winemakers.
But Kimberly Nicholas Cahill, a scientist at the University of California, Davis, recently learned that even slight increases in temperature and light concentrations also can change elements of a grape that give wine its color and aroma, which in turn affects taste and quality.
And one of the most finicky grapes is the popular -- and profitable -- pinot noir, which can only be grown to high quality within a 4-degree range of average growing-season temperatures. Generally speaking, the pinot noir region of California's Napa Valley is already at the upper limit for those temperatures, while some parts of the Puget Sound region are near the lowest.
With climate change slowly pushing the thermometer up, what does that mean for Napa Valley's multimillion-dollar pinot noir crop?
"That, of course, is the $64,000 question," said Dan Cayan, a scientist with the Scripps Institution of Oceanography at the University of California, San Diego.
It's possible the cool, moist air coming off the Pacific could moderate rising temperature's impacts on the valley. But nobody really knows for sure.
"For us, it's really too soon to say," said Napa Valley grower Dave Graves, with Saintsbury Vineyard. "Nobody's pulling up stakes and moving out."
A little extra effort
What's clearer is that growers in places such as Puget Sound increasingly seem able to produce nice wines from cooler-weather grapes, such as pinot noir, although they sometimes still need a little help.
Miller recently ripped out one row of vines after it produced a beverage he charitably dubbed "Brussels-sprout water." And to make sure his pinot noirs ripen appropriately, he still wraps the plants in plastic to form a mini-greenhouse.
But on this autumn day, the siegerrebe tasted sweet and had its perfect yellow-purple hue, so Miller ferried the grapes by tractor to a garage, where his crew took turns crushing them in an Italian-made hand-crank oak barrel. They will be used to make a low-alcohol wine that should be ready to drink by next spring.
By then, Miller will be watching the ground for the season's last frost so he can start growing again.
Craig Welch: 206-464-2093 or cwelch@seattletimes.com
This story published Oct. 12, 2009 and corrected Oct. 12, 2009 incorrectly identified scientist Dan Cayan's institution. He is a scientist with the Scripps Institution of Oceanography at the University of California, San Diego.
To see more of The Seattle Times, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.seattletimes.com. Copyright (c) 2009, Seattle Times Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.
Classification



End of Document


Plants could hold clues to climate change; Lilies on flanks of Mount Rainier may be canary in global coal mine
Times Colonist (Victoria, British Columbia)
September 9, 2012 Sunday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2012 Times Colonist, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: MONITOR; Pg. C10
Length: 717 words
Byline: Lynda V. Mapes, Seattle Times
Dateline: MOUNT RAINIER, WASHINGTON 
Body




University of Washington researcher Elinore Theobald is studying the relationship between flowers and their pollinators on Washington state's highest mountain. And what she is finding so far - avalanche lilies at higher elevation set seed at one-third the rate of lilies elsewhere on the mountain - points to troubling questions.
Is it possible that the lilies are struggling because of a mismatch in their timing with their pollinators? And does that, in turn, point to trouble as the climate changes?
Theobald, a doctoral candidate, is working with field assistants Natasha Lozanoff and Margot Tsakonas to understand not just how a single species might be affected by even small changes in temperature, but how biological interactions between species respond to changing climates.
It is, if you will, a burning question: The average annual temperature in the Pacific Northwest has increased 0.75 degrees Celsius since 1920, and is projected to increase an additional two to four degrees or more by the end of the century, according to the Climate Impacts Group at the University of Washington.
What might that mean for plant and animal communities? One way to find out is to head to the mountain, Theobald fig-ured, where the range in elevation can be a proxy for the shifts in climate that are forecast.
She posits that understanding how plant and pollinator interactions are playing out at those different elevations today might be a clue to what will occur in the future. And if you love avalanche lilies, it might not be good.
Erythronium montanum seems to be extremely diminished in its ability to set seed in some monitoring plots. The question is why. One theory Theobald is exploring is that the window of timing when the flower is ready for pollination and the presence of pollinators seeking food is quite precise.
And, as one of the first flowers to bloom in spring, there is reason to suspect avalanche lilies will be among the most sensitive to changing climate.
Change temperature, and it could alter the timing of snowmelt and flowering, putting them out of synchrony with the pollinators.
But the first step for Theobald is to understand exactly what role climate plays in determining the plant's range limits and the interaction between plants and their pollinators. Which is why, on a recent day, Theobald and Lozanoff were climbing up and down the south side of Mount Rainier, checking their five research sites at different elevations, from 5,249 feet to 5,905 feet - the limits of the plant's range today in the mountain's subalpine meadows.
The researchers have tied bags over some lilies to learn if they can self-pollinate. Answer: no. They have also, in pairs of flowers at similar elevation, hand-pollinated one flower while leaving the other alone, to see if the flowers would set seed.
So far, they have found that plants at the highest elevation were greatly limited in their ability to set fruit. Yet at lower ranges, fruit production (once seed was set) was lower than elsewhere. That suggested the problem at lower elevations wasn't pollination, but perhaps snacking by deer or even competition.
That could be bad news for the lily, too, if it's because trees, at lower elevations, are shading them out. Warming temperatures already are implicated in trees invading meadows on the mountain. Could the future be a lily squeezed at the top and the bottom of its range, limiting its survival to a narrower midrange of abundance?
It's too soon to know, but the team is gathering more data in an attempt to dissect a complex ecology, tracking snowmelt dates and temperature readings from sensors buried in the soil, and compiling, week-by-week, the life events in the plant's season - when it emerges, blooms and sets seed and fruit (or doesn't), and even counting and identifying actual pollinator visits to fill in the picture.
The observance of the plant's phenology - its seasonal events, from emergence from the snowpack to blooming and setting seed and fruit - provides visible evidence, through the power of simple observation, of how small shifts in temperature may be controlling survival.
"We don't have long-term data," Theobald said. "But we want to understand which plants are most sensitive to climate, and what resources there are for pollinators. We think there may be a link."
 Graphic



 
Mark Harrison, Seattle Times; As one of the first flowers to bloom in spring, there is reason to suspect avalanche lilies will be among the most sensitive to changing climate.; Mark Harrison, Seattle Times;  Elinore Theobald, left, and Natasha Lozanoff study avalanche lilies on Mount Rainier. The plant is one of the early bloomers in spring and may be among the most sensitive to rising temperatures.;
Classification



End of Document


Puget Sound area emerging as wine region, thanks to warmer climate
Seattle Times (Washington)
October 12, 2009 Monday

 Copyright 2009 Seattle Times
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 1239 words
Byline: Craig Welch, Seattle Times
Body




Oct. 12--SEQUIM -- Tom Miller rolls his metal stool down the row inch by inch, his long, leathery fingers pushing through the vines to clip grapes off by the bunch.
It's an early autumn morning at the top of the Olympic Peninsula, and Miller is doing something climate scientists believe would have been difficult, if not impossible, 50 years ago: harvesting grapes to make wine that people actually want to buy.
No matter whether they realize it, researchers say, Miller and a small explosion of new Western Washington wine-grape growers appear to be capitalizing on small climate shifts that are reshaping the global wine-growing map.
As climate changes threaten to wreak havoc on some of the world's most-famous wine regions -- France's Burgundy, Australia, parts of California -- experts say the cool-climate Puget Sound region might shape up to be one of the few beneficiaries.
"In the 1970s, the Willamette Valley (in Oregon) was at the cool-climate fringe for wine; it was one of the coolest places you could go and reliably ripen the fruit," said Gregory V. Jones, a climate scientist and wine expert at Southern Oregon University. But as temperatures warm in northern latitudes, "today Puget Sound is becoming that place."
Certainly technology and a growing thirst for boutique wines have helped drive where and how grapes are grown. But experts say it's increasingly possible to track the subtle ways climate change is altering landscapes by looking to vineyards around the globe.
Hotter ripening periods over the past 30 years have increased the alcohol content of rieslings in Germany's Rhine River Valley. In Napa and Sonoma, Calif., earlier springs and fewer frosts have helped boost wine quality. Australian vineyards have extended droughts, and other European growers are facing never-before-seen bug infestations. Vineyards are even cropping up in places -- such as southern England -- where they haven't been seen since before the Little Ice Age and the reign of Henry the VIII five centuries ago.
And some, like Miller's Dungeness Bay Vineyard, now are appearing where they haven't been seen at all.
Many varieties
Using clippers and wearing gloves so they don't accidentally snip off their fingertips, Miller and a group of friends fill a half-dozen plastic buckets full of a white-wine grape called siegerrebe. It's just one of several varieties that spill from tight, neat rows in his backyard.
Miller and his wife bought their Sequim property in 1995, and Miller -- a veterinarian and horticulturist -- had been using the ground to grow kale and oats to feed sheep. After stopping to visit one of the Puget Sound's first vineyards at the Bainbridge Island Winery in 2000, he thought: Why not? He had grown wine grapes before and knew enough to experiment.
"I couldn't think of a good reason not to try it," Miller said in his Scottish brogue.
He is hardly alone. Just a mile down the hill, another neighbor has started a vineyard, and a former stone carver from Italy has planted several thousand vines outside Port Angeles. In fact, while Western Washington, like Vancouver Island, has had a handful of wineries since the 1970s, the real growth has come only in the past decade.
"In 2000, I could count the number of people growing wine grapes in Western Washington on two hands," said Gary Moulton, a horticulturist with Washington State University's research and extension center in Mount Vernon. "Now there are about 75 growing grapes commercially and another 40 or so amateurs."
The scale remains quite small given Western Washington's vastness, but like the entrepreneurs who rolled into Oregon decades ago with dreams of producing the next great red, Western Washington's newest winegrowers are pioneers.
It's unlikely even this boom could have been possible half a century ago. Unlike the Yakima or Okanogan valleys, Western Washington doesn't get or stay hot enough to produce Cabernets or good table grapes. But growing seasons between the last spring frost and the first fall freeze have lengthened up and down the West Coast since the 1950s, making it increasingly possible to consistently grow cool-weather crops, including grapes like siegerrebe, Madeleine Angevine and pinot noir.
California concern
The same pattern of early bud-breaks and bloom that's sparking a Washington revolution also is creating unease to the south.
"The best flavor in a grape arrives at a particular moment -- when it ripens, but just barely," said Chris Howell with Cain Vineyard in California's Napa Valley. "You don't want them hanging out there too long and never getting ripe. But you also don't want them to get ripe" too soon.
Top vineyards are so susceptible to minute changes in weather that even slight climate variations can make the difference between a lackluster and high-quality grape. While heat can alter the balance of sugar and acid that gives wine flavor, some of that can be adjusted by winemakers.
But Kimberly Nicholas Cahill, a scientist at the University of California, Davis, recently learned that even slight increases in temperature and light concentrations also can change elements of a grape that give wine its color and aroma, which in turn affects taste and quality.
And one of the most finicky grapes is the popular -- and profitable -- pinot noir, which can only be grown to high quality within a 4-degree range of average growing-season temperatures. Generally speaking, the pinot noir region of California's Napa Valley is already at the upper limit for those temperatures, while some parts of the Puget Sound region are near the lowest.
With climate change slowly pushing the thermometer up, what does that mean for Napa Valley's multimillion-dollar pinot noir crop?
"That, of course, is the $64,000 question," said Dan Cayan, a scientist with UC-Davis' climate-research division.
It's possible the cool, moist air coming off the Pacific could moderate rising temperature's impacts on the valley. But nobody really knows for sure.
"For us, it's really too soon to say," said Napa Valley grower Dave Graves, with Saintsbury Vineyard. "Nobody's pulling up stakes and moving out."
A little extra effort
What's clearer is that growers in places such as Puget Sound increasingly seem able to produce nice wines from cooler-weather grapes, such as pinot noir, although they sometimes still need a little help.
Miller recently ripped out one row of vines after it produced a beverage he charitably dubbed "Brussels-sprout water." And to make sure his pinot noirs ripen appropriately, he still wraps the plants in plastic to form a mini-greenhouse.
But on this autumn day, the siegerrebe tasted sweet and had its perfect yellow-purple hue, so Miller ferried the grapes by tractor to a garage, where his crew took turns crushing them in an Italian-made hand-crank oak barrel. They will be used to make a low-alcohol wine that should be ready to drink by next spring.
By then, Miller will be watching the ground for the season's last frost so he can start growing again.
Craig Welch: 206-464-2093 or cwelch@seattletimes.com
To see more of The Seattle Times, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.seattletimes.com. Copyright (c) 2009, Seattle Times Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.
Classification



End of Document


CORRECTION: Gregoire, Sims, state Democrats launch proposals to fight climate-change
Seattle Times (Washington)
February 7, 2007 Wednesday

 Copyright 2007 Seattle Times
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 759 words
Byline: Warren Cornwall and Ralph Thomas, Seattle Times
Body




CORRECTION: Information in this story, originally published February 7, 2007, was corrected February 7, 2007. An earlier version of this story incorrectly reported that Sims proposed a goal of reducing greenhouse gases emissions to 80 percent of current levels, rather than to 20 percent, by 2050.
Feb. 7--OLYMPIA -- Less than a week after scientists warned in a United Nations report that global warming is both a new certainty and very likely man-made, Washington politicians today announced a series of initiatives they say will help tackle the problem.
Gov. Christine Gregoire, state Senate Democrats and King County Executive Ron Sims all announced a raft of measures. While they differed in the details, the overall message was the same: climate change is a serious problem that demands attention now.
"The time to deny, deflect and delay is over," Sen. Erik Poulsen, D-Seattle, told a roomful of reporters, politicians and environmentalists during a press conference at the Capitol.
In an executive order signed today, Gregoire called for cuts in statewide emissions of climate-warming gases.
She wants emissions shrunk back to 1990 levels by 2020, with further reductions after that. Those targets parallel ones announced in 2005 by California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Growing emissions of gases including carbon dioxide, primarily from burning coal, oil and gas, are thought to be trapping more heat in the earth's atmosphere.
Gregoire's order also calls for reducing fuel imports to the state 20 percent by 2020 by increasing fuel efficiency and developing in-state alternatives, such as biofuels. And, during that period, it calls for adding nearly 17,000 "clean energy sector jobs" -- triple the current level.
Jay Manning, director of the state Department of Ecology, said the administration plans to convene a task force of energy experts and people from various interest groups to develop plans for reaching those targets.
"The governor is dead serious about these goals," Manning said.
Senate Democrats announced legislation that echoes Gregoire's goals for cutting greenhouse gases. They are not immediately seeking regulations to make the cuts happen.
But they went further than Gregoire, in calling for restrictions barring Washington utilities from signing long-term contracts for electricity from dirtier power plants, particularly coal-fired plants.
California has already passed similar limits.
Poulsen, D-Seattle, has acknowledged this measure could prove the most controversial.
A number of utilities rely on coal power for some of their electricity, and one, Energy Northwest, wants to build a coal-fired plant near Kalama. That plant could be jeopardized by the proposed limits.
Manning said some businesses and individuals will "feel their ox is being gored in some unfair way" by the changes they will be forced to make in order to meet the new goals.
But he said most utilities and business leaders "recognize that business as usual is not an option."
Poulsen said the key question for lawmakers, business leaders and consumers is "are we willing to pay a little bit more to get serious about climate change? ... I hope that we are."
Earlier in the day in Seattle, King County Executive Ron Sims, calling global warming "the defining issue for humankind in the 21st century," called for reducing the region's climate-disrupting pollution to 20 percent of current levels by 2050.
To gain support for that goal -- and develop strategies for reaching it -- Sims said he will convene a group of government, business and environmental leaders.
After making his announcement, Sims then traveled to Olympia in a demonstration model of a plug-in electric hybrid car, which can run entirely on electricity for short distances, or switch over to a gasoline engine.
Sims and the Senate Democrats' both call for increasing state and county purchases of plug-in hybrids.
K.C. Golden, policy director of an Olympia-based non-profit group called Climate Solutions, praised today's announcments, saying the climate change alarm has been sounding for more than 20 years.
"We have been hitting the snooze button, rolling over and going back to sleep," he said.
Staff reporter Keith Ervin contributed to this report.
Ralph Thomas: 360-943-9882 or rthomas@seattletimes.com
Copyright (c) 2007, Seattle Times Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.
Classification



End of Document


U.N. leader: Global climate change is up to the U.S.
Seattle Times (Washington)
October 26, 2009 Monday

 Copyright 2009 Seattle Times
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 872 words
Byline: Sandi Doughton and Kristi Heim, Seattle Times
Body




Oct. 26--Global warming will never be reined in unless the United States leads the way, United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said Sunday at the start of a two-day visit to Seattle.
Ban praised the city for setting an example with policies to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions, and said such local initiatives help build momentum for national policies.
"All the world is now looking to the leadership of the United States and President Obama," Ban said in an interview.
Since taking the top job at the United Nations in 2007, Ban has made climate change a priority and has been pressing nations to commit to firm emission limits when they meet in December in Copenhagen to negotiate a successor agreement to the Kyoto climate accords.
The former South Korean foreign minister is also on a mission to improve relations with an American public often ambivalent -- and occasionally hostile -- to the international body.
"Having a strong partnership between the U.S. and the U.N., as well as getting ... the appreciation of the American public for the work the U.N. is doing, is very important," he said.
The fact that Seattle is the hometown of one particular, wealthy American philanthropist is also a factor in Ban's visit. He will join Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates and his wife, Melinda, for breakfast today at their Medina mansion, to discuss ways to reduce maternal death rates around the world.
A woman dies every minute from preventable complications of pregnancy or childbirth, Ban said.
"This is what we have to stop," he said. "Government support is crucial, but so, too, is private funding. That is why I'm going to discuss this matter with Bill Gates."
The Gates Foundation and the U.N. have collaborated on development and food programs, including an effort called Purchase for Progress (P4P). The project aims to turn hundreds of thousands of small farmers in Africa and Latin America into suppliers for the U.N.'s World Food Programme, which provides food for 90 million people in 80 countries and has a budget of nearly $3 billion this year.
Climate change complicates many other problems the U.N. is working to solve, Ban said, such as poverty and famine and the ensuing political instability.
In 2000 the U.N. set a series of targets called Millennium Development Goals for improving health and reducing poverty by 2015, but the food crisis and global economic downturn have stymied progress. No country in sub-Saharan Africa is currently on track to meet those goals, Ban said.
Ban said he is creating an advocacy group for a renewed push to achieve the Millennium Development Goals, and will ask Bill Gates to join it.
The Henry M. Jackson School of International Studies at the University of Washington initiated Ban's visit by asking him to help celebrate the school's centennial, said director Anand Yang.
Ban will receive an honorary degree, meet with business leaders at the Greater Seattle Chamber of Commerce, and participate in a discussion with representatives from civic groups, charities and others at a forum sponsored by the World Affairs Council.
After nearly three years on the job, reviews of Ban have been mixed. Some critics say he's failed to speak out forcefully enough to exercise the U.N.'s moral leadership role in public.
But Ban strongly defended the U.N.'s performance. With little real power, diplomacy and a bully pulpit are the secretary-general's main tools, and Ban said it's important to use each judiciously.
While some may view the U.N. as ineffective, situations such as the ethnic conflict in Darfur would be far worse without its presence, he said. Ban added that he has been able to deploy 90 percent of the 26,000 peacekeepers authorized to the region, which is more peacekeepers than the U.N. had deployed around the world a decade ago. The Darfur efforts have saved half a million lives, he said.
He also acknowledged that the U.N. faces an unprecedented number of global issues at the same time.
"Have you ever seen in our history when the ... international community has been hit all at once by all these crises: climate change, economic crisis, food security, energy crisis, pandemic?"
Ban said his commitment to climate change was partly inspired by travels to Antarctica, Bangladesh, Brazil and the Arctic, where melting ice, floods and ecosystem disruptions are already under way.
He said he's hopeful that after more than a decade of resistance, the U.S. Senate will soon adopt legislation to limit carbon emissions. President Obama has committed to action, but it's time for concrete steps, Ban said.
If the U.S. fails to act soon, India and China may bail out of climate negotiations and erase any progress with their rapidly rising greenhouse- gas emissions, he warned.
Sandi Doughton: 206-464-2491 or sdoughton@seattletimes.com
Kristi Heim: 206-464-2718 or kheim@seattletimes.com
To see more of The Seattle Times, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.seattletimes.com. Copyright (c) 2009, Seattle Times Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.
Classification



End of Document


Warming climate may prove costly for state, study warns
Seattle Times (Washington)
January 11, 2007 Thursday

 Copyright 2007 Seattle Times
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 626 words
Byline: Warren Cornwall, Seattle Times
Body




Jan. 11--A warming climate could cost Washington governments and businesses tens of millions of dollars every year in drought-stricken crops, forest fires and tightened water supplies, according to a new state study.
It is the first such analysis illuminating how rising temperatures and shifting snow patterns could ripple through the economy.
Yakima Valley farmers could experience more crop losses as snowpack declines. Forest fires could double in size, driving up the costs of fighting them and hurting tourism. Dairies in Whatcom County might produce less milk. Cities, including Seattle, could spend millions more on water conservation or expand their water-storage dams. More than 50 square miles of Washington land could wind up underwater if sea levels rise two feet.
"The impacts we found are significant," said Bob Doppelt, director of the University of Oregon's Climate Leadership Initiative, which led the study. "But we also think they're manageable."
The $100,000 study was funded by public money and a grant from the Energy Foundation, a coalition of groups interested in environmental issues. The research was overseen by a panel of scientists and state officials.
Winners and losers
The report didn't put an overall price tag on the cost of climate change. But the findings could help guide efforts to prepare for climate change while reducing the state's contributions to it, said Janice Adair, a top official at the state Department of Ecology.
There could be winners as well as losers in a warmer, rainier Washington.
Some varieties of wine grapes could flourish in Western Washington, even as warmer weather could make it harder for Eastern Washington vineyards to grow other types, according to the study.
The international push to reduce greenhouse gas is also creating a market for new technology and equipment, which Washington companies could tap into, the report said.
While it didn't estimate how much could come to the state, there is money to be made from energy technology, fuel cells, fuels made from vegetable matter, and more fuel-efficient machines, the report said. For example, Boeing's new 787 airplane is being designed to use less fuel than competing airplanes.
Long-term impact
The impacts of climate change could multiply in the distant future, if climate change proceeds unchecked, cautioned Doppelt.
The study looked at expected changes between now and the 2040s, assuming average temperatures would have risen between 2 and 3 degrees Fahrenheit.
"The greatest economic impacts are likely to be in the second part of this century," he said. "In order to avoid these long-term impacts we really have to start now."
A sobering note came from another new report that shows greenhouse-gas emissions are rising in Washington. That comes after a brief drop tied to the 2001 economic recession and energy crisis.
By 2004 -- the latest data available -- the state had returned to steady increases in emissions. Since 1990, greenhouse gas puffed from Washington tail pipes, power plants and furnaces has increased more than 12 percent, to roughly 88 million metric tons of carbon dioxide.
For comparison, the international Kyoto treaty to reduce greenhouse gases calls for nations like the U.S. to bring emissions to 7 percent below 1990 levels by 2012. The U.S. is not taking part in the treaty. The state's annual emissions are roughly 0.3 percent of global greenhouse-gas production.
Warren Cornwall: 206-464-2311 or wcornwall@seattletimes.com
Copyright (c) 2007, Seattle Times Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.
Classification



End of Document
